Title: Hierarchical Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for Warehouse Robot Coordination under Communication Loss

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.33637v1

Published Time: Tue, 29 Sep 2026 02:15:19 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Hierarchical Multi-agent Reinforcement Learning for Warehouse Robot Coordination under Communication Loss 

Weihao Sun 1, Student Member, IEEE , Gehui Xu 2, Member, IEEE , and Andreas A. Malikopoulos 1,3, Senior Member, IEEE 

Abstract — In this paper, we propose a hierarchical multi-agent reinforcement learning framework for coordinating robot teams in warehouse environments under communication loss. We partition the robot team into groups, with centralized coor-dination within each group and distributed coordination across groups. Each group uses a recurrent predictor to estimate unavailable interaction information due to communication loss. A higher-level policy then generates a compact coordination reference that conditions the local control policy within each group. A predictive safety filter evaluates and modifies the pro-posed controls when they violate safety constraints. Simulation results show improved task completion under communication loss, reduced communication growth as the team size increases, and safe operation in the tested scenarios. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Multi-agent robotic systems are increasingly deployed across a wide range of applications, including warehouse and logistics operations [1], autonomous transportation [2]–[4], and search and rescue [5]. For instance, in modern warehouse and logistics systems, mobile robot teams are widely used to transport parcels efficiently across shared workspaces [6]. Effective collaboration among the robot team can improve task execution quality and reduce reliance on manual han-dling. In these scenarios, coordination must support efficient and safe task execution despite strong interactions among robots. However, as the team size grows, these interactions require more information exchange and computational effort, making effective coordination more challenging. In this paper, we consider a large robot team coordinat-ing in a warehouse environment. The robots must jointly transport goods while avoiding collisions and satisfying their motion constraints. A centralized approach is a classical solution method that exploits complete system information. Existing work includes search-based [7] and rolling horizon planning methods [8], with other works accounting for execution delays [9]. Although such methods have demon-strated strong coordination performance for large warehouse systems, they require fleet-level information aggregation and                   

> This work is supported in part by NSF under Grants CNS-2401007, CMMI-2348381, IIS-2415478, and in part by MathWorks.
> 1W. Sun and A. A. Malikopoulos are with the Systems Engineer-ing Program, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14850 USA.

email: 

{ws493,amaliko }@cornell.edu            

> 2G. Xu is with the Department of Electrical and Electronic Engi-neering, Imperial College London, London SW7 2AZ, UK.

email: g.xu@imperial.ac.uk  

> 3A. A. Malikopoulos is with the Applied Mathematics, Systems Engi-neering, Mechanical Engineering, Electrical & Computer Engineering, and School of Civil & Environmental Engineering, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA. (email: amaliko@cornell.edu )

joint decision computation, which become increasingly de-manding as the team size grows [10], [11]. Decentralized and learning-based approaches instead allow each robot to make individual decisions. Graph neural network methods, for example, use the communication topology for coordination [12]–[14], while distributed multi-agent reinforcement learn-ing (MARL) methods exploit interaction graphs and local value functions [15]. Related MARL approaches address cooperative decision-making under partial observations [16]– [18], while methods for predicting and imputing missing observations have been explored in [19]. However, decentral-ized coordination becomes more difficult as the team grows and can degrade when shared information is temporarily unavailable. Hierarchical approaches provide an intermediate structure between centralized and decentralized coordination. Liu et al. partition a warehouse into spatial sectors and combine centralized sector-level planning with decentralized local coordination [20], while hierarchical MARL has been used for warehouse worker agent management [1]. More gen-erally, hierarchical distributed control can separate higher-level multi-agent coordination through reference generation from local control [21]. However, existing approaches do not directly address how unavailable information can be incorpo-rated into a hierarchical coordination structure under limited communication while maintaining safe robot interactions in warehouse systems. To address these challenges, we propose a hierarchi-cal MARL framework for warehouse robot coordination under communication loss. The robot team is partitioned into fixed groups, with centralized joint coordination within each group, while coordination across groups is distributed through inter-group communication. When communication becomes unavailable, a recurrent predictor implemented us-ing a gated recurrent unit (GRU) estimates the missing interaction information from previously received messages. Rather than directly providing individual robot control poli-cies, a group-level reference policy maps it to a finite co-ordination reference, which then conditions the joint control policy within each group. The hierarchical structure restricts the inter-group information influencing the local control and reduces direct dependence on inter-group shared information. Before execution, a predictive safety filter uses one-step reachable states to evaluate the proposed joint control and modifies it when necessary. A centralized critic uses the com-mon team return during training, while execution requires no global coordinator. We further provide supporting analysis of reference information flow, communication scaling, and arXiv:2609.33637v1 [eess.SY] 27 Sep 2026 the safety filter, and evaluate the proposed framework in warehouse simulation environments under different team sizes, goal assignments, and communication condition. The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. In Section II, we formulate the warehouse robot coordination problem. In Section III, we present the proposed hierarchical MARL framework, including interaction state prediction, hierarchical control, safety filtering, and centralized training with distributed group execution. Section IV presents the simulation setup and results. In Section V, we highlight the conclusion and future work. II. P ROBLEM FORMULATION 

Let N = {1, . . . , N } denote a team of N robots operating in the warehouse. The robot team is partitioned into Z

fixed and non-overlapping control groups indexed by Z =

{1, . . . , Z }. Let Nz ⊆ N denote the set of robots assigned to group z ∈ Z , such that N = S 

> z∈Z

Nz , Nz ∩ N z′ = ∅, z ̸ =

z′. We consider a fixed group partition over the task horizon, as introduced in the following assumption. 

Assumption 1 The assignment of robots to control groups is fixed over the task horizon and does not depend on the physical locations of the robots. 

We consider a grid-based warehouse environment with a feasible position set P ⊆ R2. For each robot i ∈ N z , we define its state as 

xi,z t = pi,z t , (1) where pi,z t ∈ P denotes the robot position and t =0, · · · , T − 1 denotes the time step. Each robot i ∈ N z is assigned a goal gi,z ∈ P .

We denote each robot’s control input by ui,z t ∈U. For the warehouse setting considered in this pa-per, we use the discrete control space, i.e., U =

{Up , Down , Left , Right , Wait }. Each control command specifies the motion of the robot during one time step, while 

Wait keeps the robot at its current position. For each group z, we define the group-level state and control as Xzt = ( xi,z t : i ∈ N z ), U zt = ( ui,z t : i ∈ N z ).

The corresponding global state and joint control are then denoted by Xt = ( Xzt : z ∈ Z ), U t = ( U zt : z ∈ Z ). Then, we define the robot team dynamics according to 

Xt+1 = Ft (Xt, U t) , (2) where Ft denotes the system transition function. We next specify the state information available to each group coordinator. 

Assumption 2 At each time t, the coordinator of group z

has access to the current state Xzt of all robots assigned to that group. 

Under Assumption 2, coordination is centralized with all information for each robot available within each group. Co-ordination among different groups relies on communicated information, which may be unavailable due to communica-tion loss. Thus, we introduce the following assumption. 

Assumption 3 Communication loss affects only information exchanged between different groups. 

The inter-group communication structure is described by a directed graph G = ( Z, Ec) , where (z′, z ) ∈ E c, z, z ′ ∈ Z 

indicates that group z′ may transmit coordination information to group z. Let Cz = {z′ ∈ Z : ( z′, z ) ∈ E c} denote communication neighbors of group z, i.e., the groups that may transmit information to group z.At time t, the message transmitted from group z′ to group 

z is denoted by 

M z′,z t =



Xz′ 

> t

, U z′

> t−1



. (3) Since the inter-group communication may be unavailable, we then introduce the availability indicator Az′,z t ∈ { 0, 1},where Az′,z t = 1 if the current message is successfully received and Az′,z t = 0 otherwise. Then, the information successfully received by group z at time t is collected as 

Szt =

n

M z′,z t : z′ ∈ C z , A z′,z t = 1 

o

. (4) The robot team receives a shared reward at each time step that captures progress toward assigned goals, task completion, execution efficiency, and collision avoidance. Specifically, the team reward is defined as 

Rt = 1

N

X

> z∈Z

X

> i∈N

qp

 D(pi,z t , g i,z )−D(pi,z t+1 , g i,z )

+qg 1i,z, g 

> t

−qc1i,z, c 

> t

− qτ 1i,z, u

> t

, (5) where D(pi,z t , g i,z ) denotes the distance between robot i in group z and its assigned goal, 1i,z, g 

> t

= 1 when robot i

reaches its goal for the first time at time t, 1i,z, c 

> t

= 1 if robot i is involved in a collision at time t, and 1i,z, u 

> t

= 1 if robot i has not yet completed its assigned task at time t. qp,

qg , qc, and qτ denote the positive weight of each term. For each group z ∈ Z, let μψz and πθz denote the reference and local control policies, respectively, where the reference policy generates an abstract coordination variable that conditions the local control policy, and ψz and θz are their corresponding parameters. Let ψ = ( ψz : z ∈ Z ) and 

θ = ( θz : z ∈ Z ) be the joint policy parameters across all groups. Then, the overall objective is to learn the hierarchical reference and local control policies to maximize the expected cumulative team reward 

J(ψ, θ ) = EΠψ,θ 

"T −1X

> t=0

Rt

#

, (6) where Πψ,θ denotes the joint hierarchical policy induced by the reference and local control policies. The coordination problem considered in this paper is stated as follows. 

Problem 1 Determine the reference and local control poli-cies for each group that maximize the expected finite-horizon team reward in (6) under the system dynamics (2) and inter-group communication loss. III. H IERARCHICAL COORDINATION ALGORITHM 

In this section, we introduce the proposed hierarchical MARL warehouse coordination framework. Fig. 1 illustrates the algorithm flow, combining recurrent interaction state prediction, hierarchical control for both group-level and local robots, a safety filter, and distributed group execution with centralized training. Each component will be introduced in detail in the following subsections. 

A. Inter-group Information Prediction 

The recurrent interaction state predictor estimates interac-tion information unavailable due to inter-group communica-tion loss. We implement the predictor using a GRU so that previously received communication information can be re-tained and used to estimate the missing current information. We define the predictor input as 

M z′,z t =

(

M z′,z t , Az′,z t = 1 ,

∅, Az′,z t = 0 . (7) where ∅ denotes a null input with the same fixed dimension as the encoded message. The recurrent predictor updates its hidden state and gen-erates predicted information according to 



hz′,z t , fM z′,z t



= fηz



hz′,z t−1, M z′,z t , X zt , A z′,z t



, (8) where fM z′,z t denotes the predicted information, fηz is a recurrent predictor parameterized by ηz , and hz′,z t denotes the GRU hidden state that encodes previously available inter-group information associated with group z′. If communica-tion from group z′ is available, the received message is used directly. Otherwise, the prediction is used. Specifically, 

cM z′,z t =

( M z′,z t , Az′,z t = 1 ,

fM z′,z t , Az′,z t = 0 , (9) Collecting the completed messages from all communication neighbors, the inter-group information used by group z is 

bSzt =

 cM z′,z t : z′ ∈ C z 

. (10) During centralized training, the training process retains the ground-truth message M z′,z t as a supervised target, regardless of the value of Az′,z t . We then define the loss function of the recurrent predictor for each group z ∈ Z as: 

Lc(ηz ) = E

" X

> z′∈C z



1 − Az′,z t

 fM z′,z t − M z′,z t

> 22

#

, (11) where 1 − Az′,z t ensures prediction error is included only when the current message from group z′ is unavailable to group z. The predictor parameters ηz are updated during centralized training using this loss. Beyond mitigating missing information, the group-based communication structure also reduces the repeated informa-tion transmission across the network. To illustrate, consider a fully decentralized reference case where all robots share their information with every other robot. Let dm denote the dimension of the complete communicated information asso-ciated with one robot. Such a structure requires N (N −1) dm

communicated scalar elements at each time step. However, in the proposed architecture, each robot’s information is incorporated once within its group and is subsequently shared at most once with each of the other Z − 1 groups. Therefore, even when the group-level messages collectively contain information from all robots, the communication load satisfies 

Chier ≤ N (Z − 1) dm, Chier 

Cdec 

≤ Z − 1

N − 1 , (12) where Cdec = N (N − 1) dm denotes the fully decentralized all to all case. Hence, when Z ≪ N , the hierarchical structure reduces repeated robot-level information sharing from O(N 2) to O(N Z ). In particular, for a fixed number of groups, the repeated communication load grows linearly with N , compared with quadratic growth for robot-level all-to-all communication. 

B. Inter-group Reference Generator 

Using the completed inter-group information bSzt con-structed in the previous subsection, we use the reference layer to generate a reduced coordination reference for each group. For group z ∈ Z , the reference policy is conditioned on the current group state Xzt , the assigned goal information, and bSzt . For robots in each group z, we collect the assigned goals in Gz =  gi,z : i ∈ N z

 , G z ∈ P |N z |. We include this information in the policy observations to ensure the reference and control policies account for the assigned goals. For each group z ∈ Z , we define the reference observation 

ozt = Enc r



Xzt , G z , bSzt



, (13) where Enc r maps the available information to a fixed-dimensional representation used by the reference policy. The reference policy then generates 

rzt ∼ μψz (· | ozt ) , rzt ∈ R z , (14) where ψz are the policy parameters, and Rz is a finite discrete reference space whose elements are abstract coor-dination variables without predefined physical meaning. During execution, a deterministic reference can be selected according to 

rzt ∈ arg max 

> r∈R z

μψz (r | ozt ) . (15) Notice that the reference policy does not directly specify the control of individual robots. Instead, it provides a reduced coordination variable that conditions the subsequent local control policy, thereby separating group coordination from detailed joint robot control. 

C. Local Control 

The local control layer then converts the group reference 

rzt into a proposed joint control for all robots assigned to group z ∈ Z. Unlike the reference policy, which incor-porates intergroup information to determine a coordination Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed hierarchical coordination framework. 

command, the local control policy operates only on the complete group state Xzt , goal information Gz , and the generated reference rzt . The local policy does not directly receive bSzt . Thus, inter-group communication only influences the proposed local control through the group-level reference. For each group z, we define the local control observation: 

wzt = Enc u (Xzt , G z , r zt ) , (16) where Enc u denotes another encoder that transforms the information into the input representation used by the local actor. Then, the local control policy generates a proposed joint control action for each group: 

eU zt ∼ πθz (· | wzt ) , eU zt ∈ U |N z |, (17) where θz denotes the parameters of the local control policy. During training, eU zt is sampled from πθz according to (17). During execution, the corresponding deterministic control can be selected according to 

eU zt ∈ arg max   

> U∈U |N z|

πθz (U | wzt ) . (18) Under this hierarchical structure, the completed inter-group information bSzt does not directly enter the local control policy, but only influences it through reference rzt . We next characterize this information flow using conditional mutual information. We define the conditional Shannon entropy and conditional mutual information [22] as 

H(rzt | Xzt ,G z ) = −E X 

> r∈R z

p(r | Xzt , G z ) log p(r | Xzt , G z ),I( bSzt ;rzt | Xzt ,G z ) = H(rzt | Xzt , G z ) − H(rzt | bSzt , X zt , G z ),

where H(·), I (·) ∈ R≥0, and p(·|· ) ∈ [0 , 1] denotes the cor-responding conditional probability mass function. We then introduce the following proposition to bound the information amount. 

Proposition 1 Under the reference policy in (14) and the local control policy in (17) , conditioned on Xzt and Gz , the completed inter-group information bSzt and the proposed local control eU zt satisfy 

I  bSzt ; eU zt | Xzt , G z  ≤ H rzt | Xzt , G z  ≤ log |R z |.

Proof: From the hierarchical structure, conditioned on 

Xzt and Gz , the information bSzt influences eU zt only through 

rzt . Hence, by the conditional data processing inequality, 

I( bSzt ; eU zt | Xzt , G z ) ≤ I( bSzt ; rzt | Xzt , G z ). By the definition above, I( bSzt ; rzt | Xzt , G z ) = H(rzt | Xzt , G z ) − H(rzt |

bSzt , X zt , G z ) ≤ H(rzt | Xzt , G z ), since conditional entropy is nonnegative. Finally, since rzt ∈ R z and Rz is finite, its conditional entropy is maximized by the uniform distribution over Rz , yielding H(rzt | Xzt , G z ) ≤ log |R z |.Proposition 1 shows that the finite reference restricts the inter-group information influencing the proposed local control to at most log |R z |. Rather than conditioning the local policy directly on the complete inter-group information bSzt ,the hierarchical structure channels this information through the finite reference, thereby bounding it in terms of the reference space cardinality. This mechanism introduces a trade-off: a smaller reference space provides stronger com-pression but may discard useful information, whereas a larger reference space may preserve more information at the cost of weaker compression. Thus, the choice and cardinality of the reference space constitute important design considerations and remain topics for future investigation. 

Remark 1 Proposition 1 applies to the learned hierarchical policy before safety filtering. The executed control U zt may additionally depend on bSzt through the safety filter. 

Since the proposed control eU zt is generated by the learned policy without explicit enforcement of the physical and operational constraints of the warehouse, it is passed through a safety filter before execution, which is introduced in the following subsection. D. Safety Filter 

The local policy does not execute the proposed joint control directly. Instead, each group applies a predictive safety filter that evaluates the proposed control using a one-step prediction of the robot motion. At each time step, the filter uses the current group state Xzt , the proposed joint control eU zt , and the completed inter-group information bSzt

to evaluate potential conflicts at the next time step. The filter first constructs the possible one-step states of robots in neighboring groups. It then examines candidate joint controls for group z in non-decreasing order of their deviation from 

eU zt , predicts the resulting next state of group z, and selects the first candidate satisfying the safety conditions. If no examined candidate is admissible, a predefined fallback control is applied. The filter first uses bSzt to construct one-step predictions of robots in neighboring groups. For each neighboring group 

z′ ∈ C z and robot j ∈ N z′ , let bpj,z ′ 

> t

denote its received or predicted current position contained in bXz′ 

> t

. Since the current control U z′ 

> t

is not assumed to be available to other groups, the corresponding one-step reachable state set is defined as 

Ωj,z ′ 

> t+1

=

n

F j,z ′

> t

bpj,z ′ 

> t

, u ′

: u′ ∈ U

o

, j ∈ N z′ , z ′ ∈ C z ,

(19) where Ωj,z ′ 

> t+1

⊆ P contains the possible next positions of robot j in group z′, and F j,z ′ 

> t

denotes the corresponding robot component of the system transition in (2). After constructing the reachable sets of the neighboring robots, the filter generates candidate joint controls for any group z ∈ Z. For a candidate joint control U = ( ui,z : i ∈Nz ) and the proposed joint control eU zt = ( eui,z t : i ∈ N z ),we define the control deviation 

Dz (U, eU zt ) = X

> i∈N z

1

n

ui,z ̸ = eui,z t

o

, (20) where 1{·} denotes the indicator function, Dz (U, eU zt ) ∈{0, · · · , |N z |} . This deviation therefore measures the number of individual robot controls modified relative to the policy output. The candidate search is controlled by two parameters. The search radius L ∈ { 0, . . . , |N z |} specifies the maximum allowable deviation, i.e., Dz (U, eU zt ) ≤ L. The candidate budget Cmax ∈ N specifies the maximum number of candi-date controls examined at each time step. Candidate controls are evaluated in non-decreasing order of Dz (U, eU zt ) until an admissible candidate is found, or the budget is exhausted. For each candidate joint control U , the filter predicts the next state of group z ∈ Z according to 

bXzt+1 (U ) = F zt (Xzt , U ) , (21) where F zt denotes the system transition in (2) restricted to the robots in group z. Thus, bXzt+1 (U ) is the predicted state resulting from applying candidate U to the current group state Xzt .Each candidate control U is then evaluated by comparing the predicted next state of group z against the one-step safety conditions defined below. Let bpi,z t+1 (U ) denote the position component of bXzt+1 (U ) corresponding to robot i ∈ N z . A candidate control U is admissible if and only if 

bpi,z t+1 (U ) ∈ P , ∀i ∈ N z , (22) 

bpi,z t+1 (U )̸ = bpj,z t+1 (U ), ∀i, j ∈ N z , i ̸ = j, 

 bpi,z t+1 (U ), bpj,z t+1 (U )̸ =  pj,z t , p i,z t

, ∀i, j ∈ N z , i ̸ = j, 

bpi,z t+1 (U ) − p′

> 2

> 0, ∀z′∈C z , ∀i∈N z ,   

> ∀j∈N z′,∀p′∈Ωj,z ′
> t+1 .

The first condition requires the predicted position of each robot in group z to remain in the feasible warehouse region. The second and third conditions prevent collisions within one group z by excluding simultaneous occupancy of the same position and pairwise position exchanges. The final condition prevents a robot in group z from occupying the same position as any possible next position of a robot in a neighboring group. The first candidate satisfying all conditions is selected as the executed control. The search terminates immediately after such a candidate is found. If no examined candidate is admissible within the search radius and candidate budget, the filter applies the joint W AIT control as the fallback action. The following result characterizes a sufficient candidate budget for examining all controls within radius L. Let nz =

|N z | denote the number of robots in group z, and m = |U| 

denote the cardinality of the individual robot control set. 

Lemma 1 Suppose an admissible candidate U exists such that Dz (U, eU zt ) ≤ L. If 

Cmax ≥

> L

X

> d=0

nz

d



(m − 1) d, (23) 

then the filter examines sufficiently many candidates to find an admissible control within the search radius. Proof: For a candidate differing from eU zt in exactly 

d robot controls, there are  nz

> d

 ways to select the modified robots and (m−1) d possible alternative control assignments. Therefore, the number of candidates with deviation at most 

L is PLd=0 

 nz

> d

(m − 1) d. Hence, if Cmax is no smaller than this quantity, every candidate within the prescribed search radius can be examined, and any admissible candidate in this region is guaranteed to be found. Lemma 1 shows that the search radius L controls the tradeoff between correction capability and computational effort. Increasing L enlarges the candidate set available to the filter, while decreasing L restricts the search to controls closer to the learned proposal and reduces the search effort. We next characterize the one-step safety property provided by the reachable state sets of the interacting groups. 

Proposition 2 Suppose for each z′ ∈ C z and j ∈ N z′ , F j,z ′

> t

matches the corresponding system transition, and bpj,z ′ 

> t

=

pj,z ′ 

> t

. If a candidate control U satisfies (22) , then no inter-group collision occurs at time t + 1 for any U z′ 

> t

∈ U |N z′ |.Proof: For any U z′ 

> t

∈ U |N z′ | and each j ∈ N z′ , let 

uj,z ′ 

> t

denote the corresponding individual robot control. From (19), pj,z ′ 

> t+1

= F j,z ′

> t

 pj,z ′ 

> t

, u j,z ′

> t

 ∈ Ωj,z ′

> t+1

, since bpj,z ′ 

> t

= pj,z ′ 

> t

.Algorithm 1 Predictive Safety Filter  

> 1:

Receive eU zt , Xzt , and bSzt . 

> 2:

Construct {Ωj,z ′

> t+1

}j∈N z′ , z ′∈C z using (19).  

> 3:

Generate candidate controls in nondecreasing order of 

Dz (U, eU zt ), subject to L and Cmax . 

> 4:

for each generated candidate U do  

> 5:

Predict bXzt+1 (U ) using (21).  

> 6:

Check the admissibility conditions in (22).  

> 7:

if the candidate is admissible then  

> 8:

Set U zt = U and terminate the search.  

> 9:

end if  

> 10:

end for  

> 11:

if no examined candidate is admissible then  

> 12:

Set U zt = ( WAIT : i ∈ N z ). 

> 13:

end if  

> 14:

return U zt .Because (22) is required to hold for every p′ ∈ Ωj,z ′

> t+1

, it holds in particular for the actual position pj,z ′

> t+1

. Hence, the candidate U avoids an inter-group collision at time t + 1 .

Remark 2 Under communication loss, Ωj,z ′ 

> t+1

is constructed from the predicted position bpj,z ′ 

> t

. Therefore, the resulting safety condition depends on the accuracy of this prediction. 

The complete safety filtering procedure is summarized in Algorithm 1. 

E. Centralized Training and Distributed Group Execution 

The proposed framework follows the centralized training with distributed execution paradigm [16], [23]. During train-ing, information from all groups is available to a centralized critic, while trajectories are generated by the hierarchical policies together with the safety filter. During execution, each group coordinator independently computes a joint control for its assigned robots using its group state and available inter-group information, without a global coordinator. For the resulting trajectory, the return from time t is defined as 

Gt = XT −1 

> k=t

Rk. (24) Using the centralized value critic Vω , the team advantage is estimated as bAt = Gt − Vω (Xt). (25) The same team advantage is then used to update both levels of the hierarchical policy, while the centralized critic is trained using the realized return: 

Lr(ψz ) = −E

h bAt log μψz

 rzt | ozt

i

,

Ll(θz ) = −E

h bAt log πθz

  eU zt | wzt

i

,

LV (ω) = E

h

(Vω (Xt) − Gt)2i

. (26) where Lr(ψz ) and Ll(θz ) denote the reference and local actor losses for group z, respectively, and LV (ω) denotes the centralized critic loss. The parameters {ψz , θ z , η z }Zz=1 

and ω are optimized using their corresponding losses in (26) and Lc, respectively. Notice that the GRU predictors are trained separately from the policy gradient updates using the supervised loss Lc. During centralized training, the true messages M z′,z t remain available as supervision regardless of communication loss. Thus, the safety filter is treated as part of the closed-loop transition. Its corrections affect the resulting trajectory and team return, while the policy gradient is evaluated on the sampled policy outputs. After training, the centralized critic is discarded, and the learned policy and predictor parameters are fixed. Each group then executes independently using its recurrent predictor, ref-erence policy, local control policy, and safety filter, without access to the global state. 

F. Algorithm Summary 

The hierarchical MARL coordination algorithm is summa-rized in Algorithm 2. 

Algorithm 2 Hierarchical Warehouse Robot Coordination  

> 1:

Initialize fixed robot groups {N z }Zz=1 , reference policies 

{μψz }Zz=1 , and local control policies {πθz }Zz=1 . 

> 2:

Initialize recurrent interaction state predictors {fηz }Zz=1 . 

> 3:

Initialize centralized critic Vω . 

> 4:

for episode = 1 , . . . , M do  

> 5:

Reset the environment and recurrent predictor states.  

> 6:

for t = 0 , . . . , T − 1 do  

> 7:

for each group z ∈ Z do  

> 8:

Observe Xzt , receive Szt and {Az′,z t }z′∈C z . 

> 9:

Update GRU and construct bSzt using (8) – (10).  

> 10:

Sample rzt ∼ μψz (· | ozt ). 

> 11:

Sample eU zt ∼ πθz (· | wzt ). 

> 12:

Apply Algorithm 1 to obtain U zt . 

> 13:

end for  

> 14:

Execute Ut = ( U zt : z ∈ Z ), observe Xt+1 and Rt,and store the rollout data.  

> 15:

end for  

> 16:

Update centralized critic Vω . 

> 17:

Update {ψz , θ z }Zz=1 using the common advantage.  

> 18:

Update {ηz }Zz=1 using Lc. 

> 19:

end for 

IV. E XPERIMENTS 

We evaluate the proposed framework in a warehouse navigation environment with fixed shelves, walls, open aisles, and intersecting robot flows. The simulation experiments are designed to examine the performance and robustness of the proposed solution. 

A. Simulation Setup 

The simulations are conducted in warehouse layouts con-sisting of fixed shelf obstacles, traversable aisles, and shared crossing regions. For each configuration, multiple scenarios are generated by randomly sampling feasible initial and goal positions while keeping the warehouse layout fixed. These assignments create diverse traffic flows involving interactions among robots within the same control group and across different groups. Group assignments remain fixed throughout each episode and are independent of the robots’ physical lo-cations. For each configuration, a separate set of hierarchical policy parameters is trained. Communication loss is intro-duced during training and evaluation according to the speci-fied communication loss probability p. The learned policies are then evaluated with fixed parameters on independently generated scenarios under the corresponding configuration. Each episode terminates when all robots reach their assigned goals or when the prescribed horizon is reached. We consider robot teams of 20 , 40 , 60 , 80 , 90 , and 100 

robots. The robots are partitioned into Z = 4 fixed groups. Communication loss probabilities of p ∈ { 0.2, 0.4, 0.6} are considered. Each training run consists of 2000 episodes, with a maximum horizon of 500 time steps per episode. For the safety filter, we set L = 2 and Cmax = 500 . Performance is evaluated using the fraction of robots reaching their assigned goals, accumulated team return, collision rate, communica-tion payload, and safety correction rate. The success rate is defined as the fraction of robots that reach their assigned goals within the episode horizon. The safety correction rate is defined as the fraction of individual robot controls for which the executed control differs from the control proposed by the local policy. Each trained policy is evaluated over 100 

randomly generated episodes. For comparison, we consider two baseline methods. The first is a fully decentralized MARL baseline, in which each robot independently selects its control using robot-level observations and communicates with all others without the proposed group-level hierarchy. The second is IC3Net [24], implemented in the same warehouse environment. Both baselines are trained separately under matched reward, task assignment, robot team, and communication loss settings. 

B. Simulation Results 

We assess the proposed framework from multiple perspec-tives, including training convergence, task completion, com-munication load, and safety performance. We first examine the training convergence of the proposed method. Fig. 2.(a) compares the proposed method with the fully decentralized baseline for teams of 20 , 40 , and 60 robots. For 20 and 

40 robots, both methods can improve during training, while the proposed method reaches a higher final episode reward. However, when the robot team is larger, i.e., 60 in this comparison case, the fully decentralized baseline remains at a considerably lower reward, while the proposed method continues to improve and converges to a higher reward. Fig. 2.(b) further reports the training results of the proposed method for larger teams of 80 , 90 , and 100 robots. The episode reward increases consistently and stabilizes for all configurations, and converges at around 1600 episodes. We then evaluate the task completion rate under commu-nication loss. We compare the proposed method with IC3Net for team sizes of 40 and 60 robots and communication loss probabilities p ∈ {0.2, 0.4, 0.6}. Fig. 3 shows the           

> Fig. 2. Training convergence of the proposed method and the comparison baseline under different robot team sizes, with a 0.2 communication loss rate.
> Fig. 3. Success rate comparison between the proposed method and IC3Net for teams of 40 and 60 robots under communication loss probabilities p∈{0.2,0.4,0.6}.

comparison results. To visualize this, for each configuration, we sort the evaluation episodes by achieved success rate, and the horizontal axis represents the corresponding episode percentile. The proposed method achieves higher success rates across the entire range of evaluation episodes for all tested cases. This difference may be attributed to the dense robot interactions in shared aisles and intersections, where the hierarchical method with a recurrent predictor provides additional structure for handling communication loss. Moreover, we examine the communication requirement of the proposed hierarchical architecture. Fig. 4. (a) compares the communication payload per time step with the fully decentralized all-to-all communication structure. The com-munication payload is measured as the total number of scalar state and control elements transmitted across communication links in one time step, indicating the required communi-cation bandwidth. As the number of robots increases, the fully decentralized communication load grows rapidly, while the communication load of the proposed method increases approximately linearly. Fig. 4 compares the measured com-munication ratio with the analytical result we provide in Section III.A. The numerical results therefore confirm the communication-scaling analysis: the proposed architecture requires O(N Z ) communication compared to O(N 2) for robot-level all-to-all communication. Fig. 4. (a). Communication load per time step for the proposed method and the fully decentralized baseline. (b). Ratio between payloads of the two methods and the analytical result. TABLE I SAFETY FILTER PERFORMANCE UNDER p = 0 .2.

N Collision rate Correction rate Mean candidates 

40 0.00% 3.45% 3.79 60 0.00% 5.48% 16.44 80 0.00% 7.90% 24.15 90 0.00% 6.54% 35.63 100 0.00% 7.34% 24.68 

In addition, we evaluate safety-related metrics for robot team sizes 40 , 60 , 80 , 90 , and 100 under a communication loss probability of p = 0 .2. Table I summarizes the results. No collisions are observed in the evaluation episodes, while the filter modifies fewer than 8% of the proposed robot controls in all tested scenarios. The mean number of searches generally increases for larger teams, indicating that an ad-missible control can be identified within the normal safety search. These results show that the safety filter prevents observed collisions with limited modification of the learned policy outputs and bounded candidate search. V. C ONCLUDING REMARKS 

In this paper, we developed a hierarchical MARL frame-work for warehouse robot coordination under communication loss. We combined recurrent prediction of missing inter-group information, group-level reference and local control policies, and a predictive safety filter for robot team coordi-nation. We analyzed information compression, communica-tion scaling, and safety candidate search. Simulation results demonstrated the method’s effectiveness under different con-figurations. Future work will include considering adaptive and dynamic group assignment, more sophisticated reference space design, and validation in larger and more realistic warehouse environments. REFERENCES [1] A. Krnjaic, R. D. Steleac, J. D. Thomas, G. Papoudakis, L. Sch¨ afer, A. W. K. To, K.-H. Lao, M. Cubuktepe, M. Haley, P. B¨ orsting et al. ,“Scalable multi-agent reinforcement learning for warehouse logistics with robotic and human co-workers,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2024, pp. 677–684. [2] J. Dinneweth, A. Boubezoul, R. Mandiau, and S. Espi´ e, “Multi-agent reinforcement learning for autonomous vehicles: A survey,” 

Autonomous Intelligent Systems , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 27, 2022. [3] W. Sun, G. Xu, A. Moreschini, T. Parisini, and A. A. Malikopoulos, “A functional learning approach for team-optimal traffic coordination,” in 2026 IEEE 65th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2026. [4] A. A. Malikopoulos, L. E. Beaver, and I. V. Chremos, “Optimal time trajectory and coordination for connected and automated vehicles,” 

Automatica , vol. 125, no. 109469, 2021. [5] D. S. Drew, “Multi-agent systems for search and rescue applications,” 

Current Robotics Reports , vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 189–200, 2021. [6] A. Agaskar, S. Siva, W. Pickering, K. O’Brien, C. Kekeh, A. Li, B. G. Sarker, A. Chua, M. Nemade, C. Thattai et al. , “Deepfleet: Multi-agent foundation models for mobile robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.08574 , 2025. [7] K. Jia, C. Peng, Y. Du, H. Wen, Y. Gao, and Z. Zhang, “Conflict-based strategy combined integrated optimal conflict avoidance algorithm: K. jia et al.” Scientific Reports , vol. 15, no. 1, p. 5670, 2025. [8] J. Li, A. Tinka, S. Kiesel, J. W. Durham, T. S. Kumar, and S. Koenig, “Lifelong multi-agent path finding in large-scale warehouses,” in 

Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 35, no. 13, 2021, pp. 11 272–11 281. [9] H. Ma, T. S. Kumar, and S. Koenig, “Multi-agent path finding with delay probabilities,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 31, no. 1, 2017. [10] A. A. Malikopoulos, “On team decision problems with nonclassical information structures,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control ,vol. 68, no. 7, pp. 3915–3930, 2023. [11] ——, “Dynamic team decision problems with two-member nonclas-sical information structures,” Journal of Control and Decision , vol. DOI: 10.1080/23307706.2025.2589411, 2025. [12] Q. Li, F. Gama, A. Ribeiro, and A. Prorok, “Graph neural networks for decentralized multi-robot path planning,” in 2020 IEEE/RSJ inter-national conference on intelligent robots and systems (IROS) . IEEE, 2020, pp. 11 785–11 792. [13] Q. Li, W. Lin, Z. Liu, and A. Prorok, “Message-aware graph attention networks for large-scale multi-robot path planning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 5533–5540, 2021. [14] V.-A. Le, P. Kounatidis, and A. A. Malikopoulos, “Combining graph attention networks and distributed optimization for multi-robot mixed-integer convex programming,” in 2025 IEEE 64th Conference on Decision and Control (CDC) , 2025, pp. 4440–4445. [15] G. Jing, H. Bai, J. George, A. Chakrabortty, and P. K. Sharma, “Dis-tributed multiagent reinforcement learning based on graph-induced local value functions,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control ,vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 6636–6651, 2024. [16] R. Lowe, Y. I. Wu, A. Tamar, J. Harb, O. Pieter Abbeel, and I. Mor-datch, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive environments,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 30, 2017. [17] Y. Zhang and M. M. Zavlanos, “Cooperative multiagent reinforcement learning with partial observations,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control , vol. 69, no. 2, pp. 968–981, 2023. [18] C. Amato, G. Chowdhary, A. Geramifard, N. K. ¨Ure, and M. J. Kochenderfer, “Decentralized control of partially observable markov decision processes,” in 52nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control . IEEE, 2013, pp. 2398–2405. [19] P. P. Santos, D. S. Carvalho, M. Vasco, A. Sardinha, P. A. Santos, A. Paiva, and F. S. Melo, “Centralized training with hybrid execu-tion in multi-agent reinforcement learning via predictive observation imputation,” Artificial Intelligence , p. 104404, 2025. [20] Z. Liu, H. Wang, H. Wei, M. Liu, and Y.-H. Liu, “Prediction, planning, and coordination of thousand-warehousing-robot networks with motion and communication uncertainties,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering , vol. 18, no. 4, pp. 1705–1717, 2020. [21] X. Wang, Y. Xu, Y. Cao, and S. Li, “A hierarchical design framework for distributed control of multi-agent systems,” Automatica , vol. 160, p. 111402, 2024. [22] T. M. Cover, J. A. Thomas, and J. Kieffer, Elements of information theory . wiley New York, 1991, vol. 2. [23] J. Foerster, G. Farquhar, T. Afouras, N. Nardelli, and S. Whiteson, “Counterfactual multi-agent policy gradients,” in Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence , vol. 32, no. 1, 2018. [24] A. Singh, T. Jain, and S. Sukhbaatar, “Learning when to communicate at scale in multiagent cooperative and competitive tasks,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1812.09755 , 2018.