Title: HELIX: Model-Harness Co-evolution for Recursive Self-Improvement

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.13951v1

Published Time: Mon, 17 Aug 2026 00:24:43 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
# HELIX: Model–Harness Co-evolution for Recursive Self-Improvement 

Tianyu Fan, Chao Huang In 3 Lab, The University of Hong Kong How to build RSI system: Model-Harness Co-evolution     

> System state Zt= ( Mt, Φ t) re-enters the next round as Zt+ 1
> Build harnesses
> portfolio for model Mₜ
> Interact
> Mₜ ↔ Hᵢ on matched tasks
> Verify experience
> sibling outcomes and provenance
> Update model
> learn from veri fi ed sibling data
> Updated model
> Mₜ₊₁ changes the capability pro fi le
> RSI return: rebuild Φₜ₊₁ for Mₜ₊₁ → next state Zₜ₊₁

Abstract 

Scaling agent capability has largely been pursued through one lens: make the model better. Yet a model acts through a runtime harness that mediates context, tools, control flow, permissions, and stopping decisions. The harness is not a neutral wrapper—it is an active co-determinant of agent behavior. For interactive agents, its influence is recursive: it governs how the model executes today and shapes the trajectories from which the model learns tomorrow. Treating model and harness as independent artifacts severs this feedback loop. We argue that closing it requires model–harness co-evolution as a first-class principle. Co-evolution rejects a false asymmetry in which one component evolves while the other stays frozen. Harness design governs fixed-model execution and structures the data through which the model improves. A stronger model, in turn, may favor a different harness that matches its new capability profile. This bidirectional dependency gives harness building a dual purpose: producing stronger immediate execution, and generating verified sibling trajectories —paired outcomes capturing successes, regressions, near misses, and alternative solutions—as structured training signal for the next model update. Recent approaches have begun to connect harness adaptation with model learning, but making this handoff source-traceable and auditable across heterogeneous runtime designs remains difficult. We organize our approach around build–update–rebuild : build source-traceable harnesses for a fixed model; update the model from verified sibling trajectories; rebuild the harnesses for the updated model, whose shifted capability profile may favor different runtime designs. Within this paradigm, we present HELIX , a source-traceable substrate for dual-purpose harness building. It decomposes OpenCode, Pi Mono, Nanobot, and Hermes Agent into typed ports, atoms, recipes, product shells, and runtime policies—making interventions explicit rather than implicit in ad-hoc prompting. Pre-execution checks ensure auditability. An evidence plane retains traces, test results, policy decisions, and provenance, preserving outcome richness rather than collapsing to a single success bit. HELIX exposes 96 ports per product contract and enumerates 4 5 = 1 ,024 coupled recipes, or 4 6 = 4 ,096 when acceptance is independently selected. We validate both sides of the co-evolution loop. On the execution side, a 65-candidate evolution round finds a fixed harness that improves task coverage by 4.0% over Pi, while the complete post-hoc portfolio exposes up to 58.0% more coverage. Selected members are then evaluated with repeated runs and the official SWE-bench evaluator. On the learning side, a 200-slot sibling slice from this deeper validation yields 438 verified SFT, critic, filter, and preference records. The same process that improves execution today generates the data needed for tomorrow’s model update. Together, these results position source-traceable harness building as an auditable interface between execution-time harness evolution and subsequent model updating. Code is released at https://github.com/HKUDS/HELIX. arXiv:2608.13951v1 [cs.AI] 14 Aug 2026 HELIX Contents 

## Contents 

1 Introduction 4

1.1 Contributions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

2 Model–Harness Co-evolution 5

2.1 Two coupled feedback timescales . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 52.2 Two outputs of a harness-evolution round . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.3 From verified experience to the next system state . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 62.4 Fixed-harness performance versus portfolio yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 7

3 HELIX System 8

3.1 The harness as an explicit intervention variable . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.2 Source-traceable ports, atoms, and recipes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.3 Pre-execution checks and recipe enumeration . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 83.4 Model–harness interaction at runtime . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 93.5 The evidence plane preserves intervention identity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

4 Design Benefits 10 

4.1 Bounded modification makes build and rebuild practical . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 4.2 Persistent identity enables cross-round attribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 4.3 Evidence-linked siblings carry experience into model updating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11 

5 Experimental Design 12 

5.1 Evaluation goals and research questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12 5.2 LiveCodeBench-derived repair subset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 5.3 Selected-member SWE-bench Verified follow-up . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 5.4 Shared model and attempt protocol . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 

6 Results 13 

6.1 RQ1—Execution today: can evolution surpass the baseline? . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13 6.2 RQ2—Execution breadth from rapid harness evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 14 6.3 RQ3—Learning data for the next model update . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 15 

7 Discussion 18 

7.1 The return from update to rebuild makes improvement recursive . . . . . . . . . . . . . 18  

> 2HELIX Contents

7.2 The model–harness pair has two improvement frontiers . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.3 Portfolio coverage exposes execution headroom and data yield . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 7.4 Verified failures enrich model-update data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19 

8 Related Work 20 

8.1 Recursive self-improvement and model–harness co-evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8.2 Harnesses as agent–computer interfaces . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8.3 Automated harness and workflow evolution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20 8.4 Interaction data and executable software benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 

9 Limitations and Threats to Validity 21 

9.1 Scope of the evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 9.2 What causes an improvement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 9.3 Effects of attempts and selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21 9.4 Limits of automated evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 9.5 Data scale and model updating . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 9.6 Safety and maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22 

10 Conclusion 22 A Selected-Member Follow-up Results 23 

A.1 Repeated LCB evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 A.2 Official SWE-bench evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 23 

B Verifier-Grounded Case Traces 24 

B.1 Pytest: target success with regressions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 24 B.2 Xarray: a clean semantic near miss . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 25   

> 3HELIX 1Introduction

## 1 Introduction 

Scaling agent capability is usually framed as a model-improvement problem. Yet a deployed agent is an executed model–runtime pair. Between a user request and a final patch lies a substantial runtime: system instructions, context construction, session state, tool schemas, permission checks, provider adaptation, a turn loop, retry and compaction policies, stopping rules, and verifiers. We call this runtime the agent harness . It is not a neutral wrapper. By changing what the model observes, which actions it can take, how it recovers from failure, and when it stops, the harness co-determines the behavior that the agent can reach. Model and harness interact at two time scales. Within a task, the harness constructs the model’s observations and action interface; the model proposes messages and actions; and the harness checks and executes them, returns environment feedback, and decides whether the interaction should continue. Across improvement rounds, verified trajectories from these interactions shape the next model, and the changed model becomes the condition under which the harness portfolio is rebuilt. The recursively improving unit is therefore the model–harness system rather than the model alone: an updated pair re-enters the same process under externally specified tasks, objectives, and verifiers. We therefore treat model–harness co-evolution as a first-class principle for recursive self-improvement. Each harness-evolution round has two outputs. The first is stronger execution for the current model: evolution can identify a better fixed harness and expose further coverage across a rapidly built portfolio. The second is data for the next model update: matched successes, regressions, near misses, and alternative solutions become verified sibling trajectories . These outputs are not separate goals. The same harness interventions that change execution today structure the learning signal available tomorrow. The harness is therefore a behavior operator for the current model and a curriculum operator for its successor. Recent work has already demonstrated trace-driven harness adaptation and joint harness–model optimization [2, 3]. HELIX targets a complementary systems requirement: preserving intervention identity and verified evidence when runtime behavior is recomposed across heterogeneous harness families. We organize this handoff as three stages: 1. Build. For a fixed model, construct and evaluate explicit, source-traceable harness candidates on matched tasks. 2. Update. Turn the resulting verified sibling trajectories into learning records and use them to update the model. 3. Rebuild. Evolve the harness again for the updated model, whose capability profile may prefer a different runtime design. Making build–update–rebuild repeatable requires more than ad-hoc prompt or tool changes. Modern harnesses are large, tightly coupled systems, so an intervention must remain explicit, executable, and auditable as components are changed. HELIX provides this substrate. It decomposes OpenCode, Pi Mono, Nanobot, and Hermes Agent into typed ports, atoms, recipes, product shells, and runtime policies. Pre-execution checks validate declared compositions, while an evidence layer retains traces, test results, policy decisions, provenance, and outcome labels through execution. Our evaluation follows one portfolio through increasing depth. A complete 65-candidate LCB evolution matrix identifies a stronger fixed harness and exposes up to 58.0% more post-hoc portfolio coverage than Pi. Selected members then receive repeated-run and official SWE-bench validation, whose sibling artifacts yield 438 SFT, critic, filter, and preference records. Together, these results connect harness   

> 4HELIX 2Model–Harness Co-evolution

evolution for the current model to the data handoff that drives the next co-evolution round. 

1.1 Contributions 

This paper makes three contributions: 1. An auditable formulation of system-level recursive improvement. We make model–harness co-evolution explicit as build–update–rebuild, with a task-level interaction loop and a cross-round return from verified experience to model updating and harness rebuilding. 2. A bounded harness-modification substrate. HELIX represents source-derived runtime behavior as typed ports, atoms, recipes, product shells, and policies, then preserves each declared intervention through pre-execution checks, assembly, and evidence capture. 3. A verified experience handoff. We show how rapid harness evolution exposes stronger and complementary task outcomes, and how the same matched rollouts materialize as SFT, critic, filter, and preference records for model updating. 

## 2 Model–Harness Co-evolution through Build–Update–Rebuild 

The feedback loop introduced above becomes a repeatable process only when the harness is treated as both an execution policy and a data-generation policy. We treat the model–harness pair, rather than the model alone, as the state being improved. A round becomes recursive when its verified outcomes determine both the data used to update the model and the evidence used to rebuild the next harness portfolio. Because tasks, objectives, and verifiers remain externally specified, this is a bounded, verifier-grounded form of system-level recursive improvement. 

2.1 Two coupled feedback timescales 

Let the system state at round t be Zt = ( Mθt , Φt), where Mθt is the current model and Φ t = {Hϕi }i

is the harness portfolio built for it. Within a task, model and harness form a fast interaction loop: 

Hϕi constructs context and exposes actions, Mθt returns messages and tool calls, and Hϕi checks and executes those actions before returning the next observation or stopping. Across rounds, a slower improvement loop converts the resulting evidence into a model update and a rebuilt portfolio. Let x ∼ D be a task, Mθ a model with parameters θ, and Hϕ a harness with configuration and implementation parameters ϕ. A run produces a trajectory 

τt,i,x,k ∼ P (τ | x, M θt , H ϕi , k ) , (1) where t indexes a co-evolution round, i a harness candidate, and k an attempt. The trajectory includes model messages, tool calls and results, session events, workspace effects, and stopping decisions. A verifier observes the task, trajectory, workspace delta, test evidence, and policy evidence: 

yt,i,x,k = V (x, τ t,i,x,k , ∆Wt,i,x,k , Tt,i,x,k , Pt,i,x,k ) . (2) The label y need not be binary. It may distinguish resolved, target-miss, regression, no-action, policy violation, patch-noise, or evaluator gap. Because Hϕ changes both the reachable trajectory and the evidence retained afterward, the fast interaction loop determines both current behavior and the experience available to the slower improvement loop. A harness-evolution round must therefore be evaluated for execution and learning-data value together.   

> 5HELIX 2Model–Harness Co-evolution

2.2 Two outputs of a harness-evolution round 

For a fixed model, one deployment objective selects a harness that optimizes verified reward while accounting for runtime cost C and policy risk P :

Jdeploy (Mθt , H ϕ) = Ex,k [R(y, τ ) − λC (τ ) − μP (τ )] . (3) The weights λ and μ make explicit that “solves more tasks” is not the only deployment objective. A harness that succeeds through excessive tool calls, unsafe permissions, or flaky retries can be inferior to a slightly less accurate but predictable one. Fixed-harness utility is only the first output. Holding model and task fixed, the evaluated candidates also create a sibling set 

St,x = {(Hϕi , τ t,i,x,k , y t,i,x,k )}i,k . (4) This matched grouping is more informative than an undifferentiated replay buffer. A resolved patch paired with a no-action sibling isolates a failure to turn analysis into execution. Two resolved siblings with different patch hygiene create a minimality preference. A target-passing patch with a regression creates a critic negative that cannot be identified from the target test alone. A harness-evolution round therefore evaluates a portfolio rather than only its eventual winner. Let Qdata 

reward verified task novelty, contrasting outcomes, semantic proximity, and artifact quality among the trajectories produced by a candidate set C, and let St(C) denote its task-indexed sibling groups. A dual-purpose objective can be written schematically as 

C⋆t = arg max 

> C⊆H t
> [

α max  

> H∈C

Jdeploy (Mθt , H ) + βQ data (St(C)) − γC build (C)

> ]

. (5) The first term asks which fixed harness is useful now. The second asks what the full candidate portfolio reveals for learning. The objectives need not select the same candidate: a losing harness can supply a clean critic negative, while two successful harnesses can supply a minimality preference. This paper does not collapse the terms into one tuned scalar; it measures their observable proxies separately. 

2.3 From verified experience to the next system state 

Let Et = {S t,x }x∈D denote the verified, task-indexed evidence from a round. A dataset builder G maps this evidence to training records, and an update operator U changes the model: 

Dt = G(Et), θt+1 = U (θt, D t). (6) The update operator may implement supervised fine-tuning, preference optimization, verifier or critic training, reinforcement learning, or router/reranker learning. HELIX supplies the verified sibling inputs through rollout execution, verification, and evidence capture. A task-specific exporter instantiates G

over curated sibling groups. The same evidence also returns to the harness side. It can guide which component combinations are retained, pruned, or proposed when the portfolio is rebuilt for the updated model: Φt+1 = B(Φ t, E t; Mθt+1 ), Zt+1 = ( Mθt+1 , Φt+1 ) = R(Zt). (7) Here U and B need not use the same records: Dt carries supervision for the model, while component-level successes, failures, and incompatibilities in Et provide evidence for the next build. The return to Zt+1 

is what distinguishes improvement recursion from a one-off runtime refinement. 

> 6

HELIX 2 Model–Harness Co-evolution 

The rebuild step is necessary because harness utility is conditional on the model: the relevant objective is J(Mθ, H ϕ). Model updates can change error recovery, schema adherence, context sensitivity, stopping behavior, and the value of specific tools. The equality arg max 

ϕ J(Mθt+1 , H ϕ) = arg max 

ϕ J(Mθt , H ϕ) (8) need not hold. Consequently, permanently attaching a harness built for Mθt to Mθt+1 can leave performance on the table. Conversely, training a model on trajectories from only one harness can over-specialize it to that harness’s tool vocabulary and termination behavior. Rebuilding after each model update makes both dependencies observable. Figure 1 separates the two timescales. Within a task, model and harness alternate between mediated observations and actions. Across rounds, one evidence branch reports execution for the current system, while the other organizes sibling contrasts for the update and subsequent rebuild. Two Timescales of Model –Harness Recursive Improvement     

> Task-level interaction produces behavior; veri fi ed experience updates the model –harness system across rounds.
> WITHIN-TASK INTERACTION ·repeated model ↔harness turns

Model Mt

> messages, actions, and tool calls

Harness Hi ∈ Φ t

> context, tool results, permissions, retry, compaction, and stop

Sibling trajectories 

> matched model and task; di ff erent declared harnesses

Verify & audit 

> outcome, regression, artifact, and policy evidence

Execution output 

> fi xed-harness utility for the current model

Veri fi ed sibling data  

> SFT, critic, fi lter, and preference records

Model update 

> SFT / preference / RL; critic, router, reranker

Updated model Mt + 1   

> changed capability pro fi le; preferred harness can move
> context / feedback / control messages / actions execution now experience for update rebuild for Mt+ 1
> evidence guides retention / pruning / proposal
> CROSS-ROUND RECURSIVE IMPROVEMENT
> Veri fi ed experience updates the model and informs the next portfolio; the updated model –harness pair re-enters the same process.

Figure 1: Two timescales of model–harness recursive improvement. Within a task, Hi supplies context, tool results, permissions, and control decisions to Mt, while Mt returns messages and actions. Across rounds, verified sibling trajectories supply the update signal for Mt+1 , whose changed capability profile conditions the next harness rebuild. 

2.4 Fixed-harness performance versus portfolio yield 

Fixed-harness performance and portfolio breadth require different reported quantities. For a verifier 

v ∈ { 0, 1}, the observed fixed-harness task coverage with K attempts is Cov K (H) = 1

|D| 

∑

x∈D 

⊮

[

max 

1≤k≤K v(τH,x,k ) = 1 

]

. (9) For a candidate set C produced in a build round, post-hoc oracle coverage is OracleCov K (C) = 1

|D| 

∑

x∈D 

⊮

 max 

H∈C 

1≤k≤K

v(τH,x,k ) = 1 

 . (10) 

7HELIX 3 HELIX System 

Equation 10 measures potential positive-outcome yield or the routing ceiling of an observed candidate portfolio. It is deployable only if a router can choose the successful candidate before seeing the answer. We therefore report fixed coverage, successful attempt slots, and oracle coverage as separate quantities. With current execution separated from portfolio yield, we next describe how HELIX builds explicit harness interventions and preserves the evidence needed for both outputs. 

## 3 HELIX: Explicit and Auditable Harness Evolution 

HELIX operationalizes the harness side of build–update–rebuild. It turns a monolithic runtime into explicit, source-traceable interventions whose identities persist through declaration, compilation, execu-tion, and evidence capture. This section describes the representation, pre-execution checks, runtime, and evidence layer that make both build and rebuild auditable. 

3.1 The harness as an explicit intervention variable 

HELIX represents a harness as a structured composition rather than a single product label: 

H = (Hshell , H session /hooks , H config , H prompt , H tools ,Hturn , H accept , H policy 

> )

. (11) These eight dimensions cover both the model-facing interface and the environment-facing control plane. The shell exposes SDK, CLI, TUI, or web entrypoints; CLI-Anything provides a concrete example of an agent-facing CLI harness for existing software [1]. Session and hooks control lifecycle and extension events. Config normalizes provider and product behavior. Prompt and tools define the model’s observations and action vocabulary. The turn loop governs provider/tool iteration, continuation, retry, and compaction. Acceptance determines what evidence is sufficient to stop. Runtime policy constrains permissions and execution. 

3.2 Source-traceable ports, atoms, and recipes 

HELIX uses six entities to preserve intervention identity. A port defines a stable capability slot. Common atoms provide product-neutral behavior, while personality atoms preserve source-specific semantics behind the same ports. A pack expands a convenient group of atoms. A recipe binds atoms, strategies, policies, and shells into one declared candidate, and a product shell exposes that candidate through an SDK, CLI, TUI, or web surface. The compiler and lockfile retain the full expansion used by each rollout. The contracts derive behavior from OpenCode, Pi Mono, Nanobot, and Hermes Agent [18, 19, 20, 21]. Each full product contract exposes 96 ports, bindings, and swap points. The same interfaces also support a neutral Minimal contract used for compact runtime and conformance checks. 

3.3 Pre-execution checks and recipe enumeration 

The recipe compiler expands a declared composition, resolves dependencies and port bindings, and emits a deterministic lockfile for runtime assembly. Conformance, boundary, and source-purity checks flag invalid or ambiguous compositions before live evaluation. Together, these steps make candidate interventions executable and auditable without treating arbitrary modules as semantically interchangeable. Coupling 

> 8

HELIX 3 HELIX System HELIX: declared composition and evidence path 

> Solid arrows show executable assembly; dashed artifacts are derived or explicitly applied, not automatic runtime gates.

OpenCode 

> source-derived behavior

Pi Mono 

> source-derived behavior

Nanobot 

> source-derived behavior

Hermes Agent 

> source-derived behavior

Atomization               

> shell •session/hooks •con fi g•prompt •tools •turn loop •acceptance •runtime policy

Catalog atoms + declared recipe selections     

> common atoms •personality atoms •metadata recipe / harnessCombo assignments

Compiler + compatibility assembler 

> validate graph; select product-speci fi c or hybrid execution surface

Assembled runtime & product surfaces 

> SDK / CLI / TUI / Web + services → session, tools, workspace

Derived 96-port assembly contract 

> bindings, resources, lock fi le, provenance; veri fi er artifact

Separate conformance & audits 

> schema • boundary lint • source-purity report; explicitly applied

Evidence plane         

> runtime trace •workspace di ff •veri fi er status cost/cadence •fl ow graph •redacted split artifacts
> System scale: 631 unique product atom IDs; 1,156 product-contract occurrences; 1,332 including the neutral Minimal contract.

Figure 2: HELIX architecture. Source-derived behavior is represented behind stable ports and assembled into declared runtime candidates. Solid arrows show executable assembly; dashed paths show derived or explicitly applied evidence. The figure distinguishes unique atom identifiers from contract-expanded occurrences. 

session with hooks and acceptance with the turn loop leaves five independent source choices, defining 45 = 1 ,024 candidates; selecting acceptance independently yields 4 6 = 4 ,096. We enumerate this finite intervention space and use deterministic smoke screening to select candidates for live evaluation. These operations support repeatable build and rebuild while keeping every evaluated rollout linked to its intended intervention. The live experiment evaluates the structured 65-candidate slice defined in Section 5.2, not all 1,024 or 4,096 possible recipes. Figure 2 summarizes the declared composition model, audit commands, compatibility assembly path, and evidence layer. 

3.4 Model–harness interaction at runtime 

Each trajectory alternates between harness mediation and model action. The harness constructs the current observation and action interface, the model proposes a response, and the harness checks and executes its actions before returning environment feedback. The assembled runtime implements this interaction as a shared multi-step loop: 1. create or restore the session, run input and before-start hooks, and persist the user message; 2. normalize the request and build prompt/context under the selected product personality; 3. stream a provider step, normalize assistant parts, and collect proposed tool calls; 

9HELIX 4 Design Benefits 

4. run tool preflight and permission checks, execute serial or parallel batches, apply result hooks, and truncate or retry where required; 5. evaluate acceptance evidence and the provider finish reason; 6. inject a continuation when required, or stop at acceptance, request boundary, or the configured step limit; and 7. persist the transcript and session state, return the runtime trace, and let the task-parity/evaluation layer snapshot workspace effects. Context compaction, tool input normalization, permission strategy, continuation cadence, and assistant-part protocols can all change a trajectory without changing model weights. Conversely, the model’s messages and actions determine which harness transitions, tools, and stopping checks are reached next. This bidirectional interaction is the concrete mechanism behind the coupled distribution in Equation 1: neither component produces the observed trajectory in isolation. 

3.5 The evidence plane preserves intervention identity 

Each run is joined to its recipe and lockfile, logged model–task–attempt identity, runtime trace, workspace effects, verifier outcome, and policy evidence. The resulting envelope keeps the declared intervention attached to every performance comparison and exported record. 

HELIX makes harness evolution explicit and auditable 

Declared recipes become executable interventions whose identities persist from compilation through runtime evidence. The same identity supports fixed-runtime comparison and matched sibling-data construction, providing the build-to-update handoff required by model–harness co-evolution. 

## 4 Design Capabilities for Auditable Recursive Improvement 

Section 3 described how HELIX represents, assembles, and executes harness interventions. The value of this design is not merely that it produces more candidates. It changes the unit at which a harness can evolve, keeps each change attached to the evidence it produces, and turns the resulting comparisons into model-update data. From an RSI perspective, these mechanisms provide three capabilities needed to repeat the cycle: bounded modification of runtime behavior, attributable observation of its effects, and transfer of verified experience into the next update. 

4.1 Bounded modification makes build and rebuild practical 

Editing a harness couples many concerns: changing a tool interface can also disturb session behavior, provider adaptation, stopping rules, or the product shell. Repeating that process for every candidate makes both initial construction and later rebuilding expensive engineering operations. HELIX instead makes the recipe the unit of evolution. Source-derived atoms preserve existing behavior behind stable ports, while the compiler and shared execution and evidence paths are reused across candidates. The resulting design space is both broad and meaningful. A candidate selects known behavior families at declared capability slots rather than combining anonymous code fragments or duplicating a complete   

> 10 HELIX 4Design Benefits

runtime. After a model update, the same contracts can be reused while recipes are revised for the new capability profile. Build and rebuild therefore become repeatable component-level operations, making rapid portfolio construction feasible without treating every candidate as a new agent implementation. For recursive improvement, this is a bounded modification surface: the system can revise its runtime policy through declared substitutions without relying on unconstrained self-rewriting. 

4.2 Persistent identity enables cross-round attribution 

A score is difficult to interpret when a candidate name hides the configuration and code that actually ran. Wrapper leakage, implicit defaults, or an invalid binding can make the executed harness differ from the intended intervention. HELIX carries the expanded recipe and lockfile through compatibility assembly and joins them to the model–task–attempt identity and runtime evidence. Conformance, boundary, and source-purity checks expose undeclared behavior that would otherwise silently change the candidate’s meaning. This persistent identity makes an outcome useful beyond a leaderboard row. The declared composition and logged execution conditions can be reconstructed, a gain or regression can be associated with an inspectable component set, and incompatibilities can guide the next round of candidate construction. The result is not simply “version A beats version B,” but evidence about a declared harness design that can be deployed, diagnosed, or rebuilt. Across rounds, the same identity also separates two otherwise confounded questions: how an updated model behaves under a held harness, and how rebuilt harnesses change behavior for that updated model. Recipe, model, task, and attempt identity therefore provide the lineage needed to attribute recursive changes to the model, the harness, or their interaction. 

4.3 Evidence-linked siblings carry experience into model updating 

Harness modification produces trajectories, but trajectories alone are not yet structured learning data. Runs from unrelated configurations are difficult to compare when their intervention identity, workspace effects, or evaluation evidence has been lost. HELIX retains these fields in one evidence envelope and groups runs for the same model and task across declared harness interventions. Matched sibling groups are therefore produced by construction rather than recovered afterward from heterogeneous logs. This structure increases the learning value of each evolution round. A sibling group can distinguish a clean resolution from a regression, a semantic near miss, a no-action run, or a noisier alternative solution while preserving which harness produced each outcome. Table 1 summarizes how the resulting contrasts support different model-update objectives. The portfolio thus acts as a curriculum operator for its current model: it elicits multiple behaviors on matched tasks, while external execution evidence grounds which of those self-generated experiences should be learned from, contrasted, or filtered.   

> 11 HELIX 5Experimental Design

Verified pattern Export Data Description Resolved, path-clean, min-imal patch Clean SFT example A concise successful trajectory/trace. Resolved versus regression, target miss, or no action Critic example; outcome pref-erence why local progress is not sufficient for task resolution. Clean versus noisy re-solved siblings Filter example/preference pair for a certain scenario Separate solution correctness from artifact quality. Different clean resolutions Alternative SFT examples; minimality/cost preference Preserve solution diversity while preferring a smaller or cheaper trajectory. 

Table 1: Evidence-linked siblings support multiple learning objectives. The benefit is not a particular export format: intervention identity and outcome evidence remain attached as the same rollouts are reused for SFT, critic, filter, or preference learning. 

Persistent task and sibling identity also allows the exporter to keep every sibling group in one train/dev split, preventing paired or near-identical trajectories from leaking across the split boundary. Together, these capabilities connect all three stages of co-evolution. Bounded component reuse makes build and rebuild repeatable; persistent identity makes cross-round effects attributable; and evidence-linked siblings turn the current system’s interaction experience into provenance-preserving data for the update stage. We next evaluate the execution and learning outputs enabled by this design. 

## 5 Experimental Design: Two Outputs of Fixed-Model Harness Evolution 

5.1 Evaluation goals and research questions 

We evaluate one 65-candidate evolution portfolio under a shared model label, then deepen the evidence for selected members through repeated-run, cross-benchmark, and artifact-quality analysis. We therefore ask these three research questions: 

▶ RQ1: Execution beyond the baseline. Under a shared model label, can evolution find a source-pure fixed harness that surpasses the baseline, and what happens when selected members receive deeper evaluation? 

▶ RQ2: Execution breadth from rapid evolution. Beyond the best fixed harness, what additional task coverage and sibling diversity does the complete evolved portfolio expose? 

▶ RQ3: Learning data for the next update. What diversity of verified sibling outcomes does evolution produce, and how can selected-member validation turn its more deeply labeled sibling trajectories into SFT, critic, filter, and preference records? RQ1 asks whether the evolved population contains a stronger fixed runtime. RQ2 keeps the whole population and measures the behavior exposed beyond that winner. RQ3 follows selected siblings through stronger outcome and patch-quality labels into model-update data.   

> 12 HELIX 6Results

5.2 LiveCodeBench-derived repair subset 

The main evolution evaluation uses 100 fixtures derived from livecodebench/code_generation_lite 

[11]: 26 easy, 24 medium, and 50 hard. Each fixture asks the agent to modify a local solution.py . All LCB-derived results use trace-strict status : a successful slot requires an observed normalized bash call that executes test_solution.py with python or python3 , together with the corresponding passing output. The main evolution matrix contains Pi Mono and 64 Pi-centered source-pure recipes. The recipes enumerate the 4 3 choices for session/hooks, config, and tools while retaining the Pi prompt, turn loop, and acceptance behavior. Every one of the 65 candidates runs once on every task, producing 6,500 slots. This complete matrix is the primary evidence for fixed-candidate comparison and portfolio breadth. A repeated-run follow-up selects Pi and two OpenCode-family members from the same 65-candidate portfolio. These source-pure interventions were chosen for deeper mechanism analysis, not as the top two candidates in the one-attempt matrix. Each receives ten attempts per task, producing 3,000 slots. The follow-up measures both tasks with at least one success and successful slots, which capture repeated-run reliability. Detailed rows are reported in Appendix A. 

5.3 Selected-member SWE-bench Verified follow-up 

The cross-benchmark follow-up samples 55 instances from SWE-bench [12]. It transfers selected members of the same portfolio: Pi, the two leading fixed candidates in the one-attempt LCB matrix, and the two OpenCode-family members used in the repeated-run follow-up. Each receives two attempts per instance, producing 550 slots. The maximum is 200 agent steps, local concurrency is one, and task resolution is labeled by the official SWE-bench evaluator. This matrix supplies the official outcomes, patches, and sibling traces used for data analysis in RQ3. 

5.4 Shared model and attempt protocol 

Run metadata identifies MiniMax-M2.7-highspeed with deterministic=false for all SWE-bench and LiveCodeBench rollouts. 

## 6 Results: Execution Today and Learning Data Tomorrow 

The results follow one evidence chain. We first analyze all 65 candidates, then use selected-member follow-ups to test repeated-run behavior, transfer to an official evaluator, and deepen the labels needed for data materialization. 

6.1 RQ1—Execution today: can evolution surpass the baseline? 

Complete evolution matrix. Across all 65 candidates, Pi solves 50/100 tasks. The best and second-best fixed candidates solve 52/100 and 51/100, respectively. The winner uses Hermes session/hooks with the remaining components from Pi; the runner-up combines Hermes session/hooks and config with Nanobot tools and the Pi core. The best fixed result is a 4.0% relative improvement over Pi, so RQ1 has a positive but narrow answer: evolution finds a stronger fixed harness, but only two of 64 non-baseline candidates exceed Pi. 

> 13

HELIX 6 Results 1 10 20 30 40 50 60 65 Candidate rank (sorted by fi xed-candidate coverage) 010 20 30 40 50 60 Trace-strict tasks solved / 100    

> Pi: 50/100 best fi xed: 52/100
> portfolio-level union (not a fi xed score): 79/100 +29 tasks beyond Pi
> 23 non-baseline candidates solve 0 tasks
> Each candidate runs once on every task; ranks are used only for display. The portfolio union is coverage across candidates, not another fi xed candidate.
> Complete 65-candidate LCB evolution round

Figure 3: The complete 65-candidate distribution is shown. Bars show trace-strict fixed-candidate coverage under one attempt per task and are sorted only for display. Pi solves 50/100 tasks, two candidates exceed it, and the 23 zero-score non-baseline candidates are marked along the axis. The 79/100 post-hoc union is portfolio coverage, not the score of another fixed candidate. 

Selected-member validation. In the repeated LCB follow-up, the selected OpenCode-family members each cover 75/100 tasks versus 72/100 for Pi. Their successful-slot totals are 549 and 546 versus 529 for Pi. Coverage records whether a task succeeds at least once, whereas slots measure reliability across all attempts. Although the attempt budgets differ, these rows deepen the evidence rather than rerank the one-attempt matrix. On SWE-bench, the selected-member follow-up changes the preferred fixed harness. The two candidates that lead the one-attempt LCB matrix each resolve 44/55 instances, matching Pi, while the selected OpenCode-family members resolve 46/55. The strongest selected member records 86 resolved slots versus 81 for Pi. Exact candidate rows for both follow-ups appear in Appendix A. 

Finding 1: harness evolution improves execution today 

The complete 65-candidate matrix contains a fixed harness that surpasses Pi (52/100 versus 50/100). Selected-member follow-ups also contain stronger fixed harnesses under repeated LCB evaluation (75/100 versus 72/100) and official SWE-bench evaluation (46/55 versus 44/55), but the preferred member changes with the protocol. Harness evolution can therefore improve execution without implying one universal winner across environments. Finding 1 establishes the first execution result: evolution can produce a stronger fixed runtime for the current model. We next retain the wider evolved portfolio and ask how much additional behavior becomes reachable beyond that single candidate. 

6.2 RQ2—Execution breadth from rapid harness evolution 

The complete 65-candidate portfolio covers 79/100 tasks, 29 more than the Pi row in the same one-attempt matrix, and contains 1,014 trace-strict successes across 6,500 slots. This 58.0% relative coverage gain is a post-hoc union over the evolved portfolio, not a deployable fixed-harness score. Its value is the additional behavior and sibling outcomes exposed by rapid evolution. The same matrix also shows why evolution requires selection. Only two of 64 non-baseline candidates 

14 HELIX 6 Results 

exceed Pi, while 23 solve no task. Blind composition is therefore a poor deployment strategy; typed gates, cheap screens, adaptive selection, and eventually a learned router are needed to exploit complementarity without paying for every candidate. The selected-member SWE follow-up provides an official-evaluator check of the same phenomenon. Its post-hoc union covers 49/55 instances, compared with 46/55 for the best fixed member and 44/55 for Pi. This is additional evidence of complementarity and potential positive-data yield, not an online routing result. 

Finding 2: rapid evolution expands execution and sibling diversity 

Evolution requires selection. Only two of 64 evolved LCB candidates outperform Pi and 23 solve no task. Arbitrary component composition is therefore unreliable; typed gates, cheap screening, and adaptive selection are necessary parts of harness evolution. 

Evolution creates complementary coverage and data. The best fixed LCB candidate moves from 50/100 to 52/100, whereas the complete portfolio covers 79/100. The selected-member SWE union similarly exceeds its best fixed member, 49/55 versus 46/55. These post-hoc gaps are not deployable scores. They show that rapid evolution uncovers task-specific successes and failures that can support routing and provide diverse sibling data for model updating. The additional outcomes in Finding 2 are the raw material for the learning side of co-evolution. RQ3 asks which sibling contrasts become structured records for the next model update. 

6.3 RQ3—Learning data for the next model update 

From portfolio outcomes to usable labels. The 65-candidate matrix supplies broad trace-strict outcome diversity, but additional coverage is only potential data yield. A rollout becomes a plausible learning record only after outcome validity, regression behavior, patch hygiene, and intervention identity are examined. The selected-member SWE validation provides these deeper labels. Across its 550 evaluated slots, 543 contain nonempty patches. Official statuses are 411 resolved, 132 gaps, and seven empty patches. Of the nonempty patches, 486 modify production code only, 57 touch tests, and 248 contain symlink/path noise. Among the 411 resolved slots, 363 are production-only, but only 205 are both production-only and path-clean; 48 resolved patches touch tests. Official resolution is therefore necessary but not sufficient for a clean training positive. 

Sibling contrasts reveal supervision. The aggregate funnel measures quantity; paired cases identify the supervision carried by that yield. We draw three SWE-bench contrasts from the official-evaluator follow-up and two LCB-derived contrasts from the repeated-run follow-up. The former are the primary data cases; the latter provide supporting evidence about repair closure and harness-evolution fragility. Table 2 states the selection logic before interpretation. Appendix B provides the verifier-grounded traces for the Pytest and Xarray contrasts.               

> 15 HELIX 6Results Case Matched contrast Why it is useful SWE sphinx-10673 Pi 0/2; other siblings 7/8 resolved; selected gap patch 6,661 bytes vs. resolved patch 758 bytes A baseline-miss/sibling-hit contrast that links candidate complementarity to a clean official-evaluator positive. SWE pytest-5787 Matrix 2 resolved / 8 gaps; se-lected Pi patch passes 2/2 F2P but fails two P2P tests, selected sibling passes both sets Shows why target-test success alone is an unsafe positive and supplies a regression-aware critic/pref-erence pair. SWE xarray-6461 Matrix 9 resolved / 1 gap; same OpenCode shell/tools and attempt index, Pi config yields an 837-byte gap while OpenCode config yields a 778-byte resolve Both patches are single-file, production-only, path-clean, and regression-free; the observed hygiene is held constant while semantic outcomes differ. LCB v6-025-abc391-f Trace-strict: Pi 0/10 vs. Open-Code session/hooks/config/tools 4/10; first candidate success at attempt 2 Representative candidate repairs after two failed bash calls, rewrites, then executes a passing veri-fier: a supporting closure path. LCB v6-088-arc191-d Trace-strict: Pi 7/10 vs. the two recompositions 2/10 and 4/10 Both substitutions regress on the same task, pre-venting a monotonic “more active harness is bet-ter” story.

Table 2: Cases drawn from selected-member validation matrices. Selection deliberately includes gains, losses, semantic near misses, and regression evidence. Counts are descriptive outcomes from non-deterministic rollouts, not single-factor causal estimates. 

Sphinx: harness evolution yields a new verified positive. For sphinx-doc__sphinx-10673 ,both Pi attempts miss the target while seven of the other eight sibling slots resolve. The se-lected 758-byte OpenCode-config patch handles Sphinx’s virtual index documents directly in 

TocTree.parse_content() , passes the target test, and preserves all regression tests. The selected 6,661-byte Pi patch changes three files and still misses the target. The case illustrates that a broader patch is not necessarily closer to the correct semantic basin. It is the clearest end-to-end example of candidate complementarity becoming a clean positive and a resolved-versus-miss preference contrast. 

Pytest: target success with regressions is still a negative. For pytest-dev__pytest-5787 ,the selected Pi patch passes both FAIL_TO_PASS tests but breaks test_xdist_longrepr_to _str_issue_241 and test_deserialization_failure . The selected OpenCode-config sibling passes all 123 PASS_TO_PASS tests as well as both targets. The official evaluator therefore labels the former gaps-found and the latter resolved . This is a high-value critic negative: target-only evaluation would assign the wrong label. Appendix B.1 traces the paired inspection, patch, validation, and official-evaluator outcomes in detail. 

Xarray: clean does not imply correct. For pydata__xarray-6461 , the sole gap and selected resolved sibling are both clean by patch-source criteria. The gap falls back to the condition’s attributes when the scalar x input has no attribute dictionary; the resolved patch falls back to an empty dictionary, preserving the requested keep_attrs semantics. Since the provider is non-deterministic and each candidate has only two attempts, this case illustrates a configuration-aligned semantic contrast but does not prove that the config atom caused it. Appendix B.2 shows the decisive fallback difference and its official test outcome.   

> 16 HELIX 6Results

LCB closure and its counterexample. On v6-025-abc391-f , the representative Pi trace writes once and ends after a failing execution. The recomposed trace writes, encounters two bash failures, rewrites, executes the test, and receives the task-specific passing result. This is consistent with a repair-closure mechanism. Across all 1,000 slots, the config-changing recomposition records 20 more trace-strict successes and 34 fewer schema-shaped errors than Pi, but also 17 more bash-error attempts, 0.171 more tool calls per slot, and about 7.8 seconds more duration per slot. The Pi-config recomposition records 17 more trace-strict successes, 36 fewer schema errors, 22 fewer tool-error attempts, 0.042 more tool calls, and about 5.4 seconds more duration per slot. The mixed signs rule out a simple “more tools” mechanism. On v6-088-arc191-d , both recompositions regress despite representative successful traces sharing the same read–read–write–bash shape as Pi; the available trace categories do not explain the stochastic solution-quality difference. These trace-based cases support closure and fragility claims, not the primary clean-positive data claim. Pi prompt, turn loop, and acceptance are held fixed in the two LCB recompositions, so those results provide no evidence for replacing those dimensions. Even among changed dimensions, cases do not isolate a single atom: session/hooks, provider plugins, tools, optional config, and compatibility behavior move together. The case set is best understood as mechanistic evidence for harness-conditioned trajectories and as a source of graded sibling labels. These paired cases show which supervision can be recovered from sibling trajectories: clean positives, regressions, semantic near misses, and preferences between alternative patches. The next analysis checks whether the export actually contains training records with these distinctions. 

Materializing training records. From the selected-member SWE validation, a 200-slot slice spanning 20 instances and ten sibling slots per instance materializes 438 rows across several training purposes:                

> Output dataset Records Share of 438 Clean SFT 63 14.38% Cleanup-needed SFT 56 12.79% Critic negatives 52 11.87% Filter samples 113 25.80% Preference pairs 154 35.16%
> Total multi-purpose rows 438 100.00% Table 3: Verified training-data accounting from selected-member SWE validation. The export contains 438 derived rows, not 438 independent rollouts; one verified sibling can contribute to more than one objective.

The 154 preference pairs comprise 46 minimal-cleanup versus larger-cleanup pairs, 44 clean versus noisy resolved pairs, 32 minimal-clean versus larger clean pairs, 14 resolved versus regression pairs, 14 resolved versus target misses, and four resolved versus no-action pairs. The split contains 16 train instances and four dev instances with no instance crossing the boundary. The materialized full-mix split contains 339 train and 99 dev rows. Figure 4 visualizes the same reported row counts by training purpose. 

> 17

HELIX 7 Discussion 0 25 50 75 100 125 150 175 Veri fi ed derived rows Clean SFT Cleanup-needed SFT Critic negatives Filter samples Preference pairs 

> 63 56 52 113 154
> Curated from selected-member validation: 20 SWE-bench cases and 200 slot-level rows; train/dev splitting is by instance.
> Veri fi ed data accounting: 200 sibling slots → 438 derived rows

Figure 4: Verified multi-purpose rows from the selected-member sibling slice. The audit maps verifier and patch-quality labels to more than clean SFT: failed, noisy, and alternative-success siblings supply critic, filter, and preference categories. 

Finding 3: sibling contrasts become model-update records 

The distinctions exposed by the paired cases are not only post-hoc interpretations. The selected-member export maps 200 curated sibling slots into 438 structured records: successful, failed, noisy, and alternative trajectories become SFT, critic, filter, and preference data. Harness evolution therefore provides a concrete data handoff for model updating, rather than only identifying a better runtime. Together, Findings 1–3 establish the two outputs of a harness-evolution round: expanded execution for the current model and verified sibling data for the update. The discussion reconnects these outputs through build–update–rebuild. 

## 7 Discussion: From One Evolution Round to Recursive Self-Improvement 

7.1 The return from update to rebuild makes improvement recursive 

The recursion in build–update–rebuild is not recursion over model calls or subagents within one execution. It is the return of an updated model–harness state to the same improvement process. Three directed dependencies make that return explicit: the harness shapes the trajectory ( ϕt → τt); verified trajectories shape the next model ( τt → θt+1 ); and the updated capability profile changes the conditions for rebuilding the harness ( θt+1 → ϕt+1 ). The evidence from a round therefore has two destinations. Verified sibling contrasts provide supervision for the model, while component-level successes, failures, and incompatibilities inform retention, pruning, and proposal on the harness side. After the model update, repeating harness evolution under the new capability profile tests whether the preferred context, tools, recovery behavior, or stopping policy has moved. A harness that was weak for Mθt may become useful for Mθt+1 , while a previously strong harness may no longer be the best interface. This view also makes recursive progress measurable. Across rounds, evaluation should track the model 

18 HELIX 7 Discussion 

change under a held harness, shifts in harness ranking under the updated model, changes in the task and failure distribution, and the amount and quality of verified sibling experience produced by the rebuilt portfolio. These comparisons can guide the next portfolio, update objective, and routing policy while keeping model-side and harness-side changes separately attributable. 

7.2 The model–harness pair has two improvement frontiers 

The two outputs are optimized differently within one round but coupled across rounds: execution selects a useful runtime for the current model, while the portfolio retains the contrasts that drive the next update. The main evolution matrix and its selected-member validations support a conditional view of observed capability: observed agent capability = f (model , harness , task , budget , verifier) . (12) This does not diminish the model; it locates the model inside the system that turns tokens into environment effects. It also means that harness evolution has two empirical frontiers rather than one universal winner. The full LCB matrix contains a 52/100 fixed candidate and a 79/100 portfolio union, while deeper validation changes which member is preferred. The larger and more consistent effect is therefore a change in which tasks and trajectories close. That change has informational value even when the candidate is not selected for deployment. The performance frontier rewards a fixed harness that is accurate, reliable, safe, and affordable. The data frontier rewards a portfolio that produces novel verified positives, informative failures, clean alternatives, and useful contrasts. These objectives can disagree: the best deployed harness need not be the best exploration policy, and a failed candidate can still supply a well-labeled negative. 

7.3 Portfolio coverage exposes execution headroom and data yield 

Portfolio coverage is not the score of one fixed harness, but it captures two consequences of rapid evolution. First, it measures data yield . If a candidate portfolio produces a verified success for a task missed by the baseline, it has created a positive candidate trajectory even when no online router exists. Outcome, regression, and hygiene gates must still determine whether it is suitable for distillation. In this use, compute is spent during data construction rather than every deployment request. Second, it bounds the opportunity for routing. The gap between the best fixed candidate and an oracle union is the maximum improvement available to a selector over the observed portfolio and attempt budget. Realizing that gap requires a pre-outcome signal: task features, early trace features, a cheap critic, or a staged policy that can abandon an unpromising harness. The current experiments evaluate no such selector, so router performance remains an open question. 

7.4 Verified failures enrich model-update data 

Under trace-strict status, the 65-candidate matrix contains 23 zero-score candidates. It would be easy either to discard them as failed engineering or to retain them indiscriminately as negative training data. Both choices lose information. In a co-evolution framework, they serve two possible purposes:  

> ▶

They identify invalid or semantically incompatible regions that stronger conformance gates should prune before live evaluation.    

> 19 HELIX 8Related Work
> ▶

When the candidate is valid but behaves poorly, its trajectories become negatives for compatibility critics, early-failure predictors, or recipe proposal policies. However, low-quality runs must not overwhelm training. A harness failure can teach artifacts of a broken interface rather than robust problem solving; an apparently successful run can encode a regression or verifier exploit. Data builders should therefore retain harness identity, verifier rationale, outcome vector, and failure class so examples can be routed to the right objective, weighted, or excluded. 

## 8 Related Work 

The proposed cycle connects four lines of work: recursive self-improvement, runtime interfaces that shape agent behavior, automated evolution of agent systems, and learning from environment interaction. 

8.1 Recursive self-improvement and model–harness co-evolution 

Recursive self-improvement spans different objects and degrees of loop closure, from bounded behavior refinement to changes in model policies, evaluators, and the research process itself [4]. Gödel Machines provide a strong self-referential formulation in which a system rewrites its own code after proving that the change improves utility [5]. Darwin Gödel Machine replaces proof-based rewriting with empirical variation, benchmark selection, and an archive of agent-code variants [6]. These works treat the improvement target broadly and motivate asking which state returns to the next round. Recent work applies this question directly to harnesses. Recursive Harness Self-Improvement iteratively revises a prompt-level specification of the agent loop using pairwise feedback over its revision history [3]. HarnessX v3 combines typed, trace-driven harness adaptation with cross-harness GRPO and a mixed-policy replay buffer in a joint harness–model loop [2]. Against this established background, 

HELIX focuses on a complementary systems layer: recomposing behavior derived from heterogeneous open-source harnesses while preserving source identity from the declared recipe through runtime evidence and verifier-labeled sibling records. This makes the bounded model–harness state transition inspectable rather than relying on arbitrary self-rewriting. 

8.2 Harnesses as agent–computer interfaces 

ReAct interleaves language reasoning with environment actions [16], while Toolformer demonstrates self-supervised learning of when and how to call external APIs [17]. SWE-agent makes the interface itself an experimental object: its agent–computer interface changes how a model navigates repositories, edits files, and runs tests [10]. These works establish that agent behavior depends on more than static next-token prediction. HELIX extends the intervention surface from prompt/tool use to the complete runtime in Equation 11, including session semantics, configuration, turn control, acceptance, and policy. We build on this premise rather than claiming priority for treating runtime design as part of the agent. 

8.3 Automated harness and workflow evolution 

AutoFlow generates natural-language agent workflows and iteratively optimizes them [9]. Automated Design of Agentic Systems (ADAS) proposes automatically evolving agent designs and demonstrates Meta Agent Search, where a meta agent writes new code-defined agents [7]. AFlow casts code-represented workflow optimization as Monte Carlo tree search [8]. These systems report the quality   

> 20 HELIX 9Limitations and Threats to Validity

of discovered workflows or agent programs. Our evaluation additionally treats trajectories from non-selected candidates as an explicit output linked to matched siblings and graded execution evidence. A non-winning candidate can therefore contribute a regression example, semantic near miss, artifact-quality negative, or preference contrast. 

8.4 Interaction data and executable software benchmarks 

LiveCodeBench provides a continuously updated evaluation for code capabilities [11]; SWE-bench turns real GitHub issues into executable repository-level tasks [12]. SWE-Gym supplies software-engineering training environments and trajectories for agents and verifiers [13], while SWE-smith scales synthetic software-engineering task construction across repositories [14]. Learn-by-Interact constructs agent training data from environment interaction trajectories and applies it to training and in-context adaptation [15]. Taken together, prior work improves runtime interfaces, evolves workflows, or learns from interaction data. HELIX connects these strands through a source-traceable build-to-update handoff. The same declared interventions yield evidence about current execution and matched sibling records for subsequent model updating, making the connection explicit and auditable at the level of source-derived harness components and matched sibling records. 

## 9 Limitations and Threats to Validity 

9.1 Scope of the evaluation 

The main evolution matrix uses 100 AtCoder tasks and checks only their public tests. It therefore does not measure hidden-test or official LiveCodeBench performance. The tasks are the first 100 eligible examples rather than a random sample. The selected-member SWE follow-up covers 55 Verified tasks. All evaluations concern coding agents, so the results may not apply to other types of agents. 

9.2 What causes an improvement 

Each evolved harness changes several components at once. We can measure the effect of the whole harness, but we cannot tell which individual component caused the change. Future experiments should change one component at a time while keeping the others fixed. 

9.3 Effects of attempts and selection 

Coverage usually increases when more attempts or harnesses are tried. Oracle coverage is calculated after seeing all outcomes, so it does not represent a harness choice made before deployment. The 65-candidate matrix uses one attempt per candidate–task pair, while the selected-member LCB and SWE validations use ten and two attempts, respectively. Their rankings are therefore not directly comparable, and selecting members for deeper evaluation can introduce selection effects. Future work should use separate tasks for evolution and final evaluation, repeat every candidate under a common budget, and compare methods under the same total compute.   

> 21 HELIX 10 Conclusion

9.4 Limits of automated evaluation 

Tests do not capture every requirement. A patch may pass while changing tests, making unnecessary edits, or exploiting the evaluator. A correct patch may also fail because of a timeout or a broken environment. We keep several labels to make these cases visible, but some still require human review. 

9.5 Data scale and model updating 

This paper materializes model-update data but does not train an updated model. First, the verified sibling dataset must be scaled beyond the current evaluation before model updating can be evaluated convincingly. HELIX can automate candidate execution, verification, and data export at larger scale, but generating broad portfolios and repeated rollouts still requires substantial token budgets. Second, closing the loop requires more than additional data: it also requires training methods suitable for RSI that can learn from heterogeneous sibling signals while controlling regressions and preserving general capability across rounds. Both cost-efficient data scaling and reliable recursive model updating remain important directions for completing multi-round build–update–rebuild experiments. 

9.6 Safety and maintenance 

Agents can run unsafe commands, change files, and leak secrets through traces. Combining components from different harnesses can also create unsafe permissions. Experiments should therefore use isolated workspaces, limited permissions and network access, and trace redaction. Because the upstream harnesses change over time, their integrations and safety checks must be tested again after an update. 

## 10 Conclusion 

Recursive self-improvement for an interactive agent should improve the executed system, not the model in isolation. At round t, the harness portfolio Φ t changes which behaviors Mt can reach and which experiences it produces. The resulting verified experience can update the model to Mt+1 ; because that update changes the capability profile, it can also change which harness is preferred. The recursively improving state is therefore Zt = ( Mt, Φt), and the return from Zt to Zt+1 is the defining structure of model–harness co-evolution. Model, harness, and data therefore form a coupled improvement system. The model’s capability profile determines which harnesses are effective; each harness changes how the model acts and which experiences it produces; and those experiences become the data that shapes the next model. HELIX makes this three-way influence usable for RSI by evolving harnesses around the current model and preserving verified differences among their trajectories as model-update data. Harness evolution then serves not only current execution but also the next round of system improvement. Build–update–rebuild turns this three-way influence into an RSI process. Harness evolution produces verified experience; model training absorbs that experience; and the updated model returns to harness evolution rather than inheriting a permanently fixed runtime. Scaling experience, applying reliable model updates, and comparing held with rebuilt harnesses across rounds are the next steps toward repeated Zt → Zt+1 improvement. HELIX makes this recursive transition auditable. 

> 22

HELIX A Selected-Member Follow-up Results 

## A Selected-Member Follow-up Results 

Every candidate below is already a member of the 65-candidate evolution portfolio. These tables report their deeper evaluation. 

A.1 Repeated LCB evaluation 

Selected member Tasks ≥1/10 Successful slots Pi Mono 72/100 529/1,000 OpenCode session/hooks/config/tools; other modules Pi 75/100 549 /1,000 OpenCode session/hooks/tools; other modules Pi 75/100 546/1,000 

Table 4: Repeated-run validation of selected portfolio members. All LCB outcomes use trace-strict status. Tasks count at least one successful attempt out of ten; slots count successful attempts out of 1,000. “Pi core” denotes Pi prompt, turn loop, and acceptance; the third row also retains Pi config. 

A.2 Official SWE-bench evaluation 

Selected member Nonempty Resolved slots Gaps Empty Tasks ≥1/2 Pi Mono 108/110 81 27 2 44/55 Hermes session/hooks + Pi remainder 108/110 81 27 2 44/55 Hermes session/hooks/config + Nanobot tools + Pi core 109/110 80 29 1 44/55 OpenCode session/hooks/tools + Pi config/core 109/110 83 26 1 46/55 

OpenCode session/hooks/config/tools + Pi core 109/110 86 23 1 46/55 

Selected-member post-hoc union 49/55 

Table 5: Official-evaluator validation of selected portfolio members. Each member has two slots per task. “Resolved slots” counts successful attempts; the final column counts tasks with at least one resolved attempt. The union is portfolio coverage, not fixed-harness performance. 

23 HELIX B Verifier-Grounded Case Traces 

## B Verifier-Grounded Case Traces 

The following tables reconstruct the two paired cases from the persisted rollout transcript, extracted patch, and official SWE-bench evaluator output. They retain the chronological, decision-relevant steps—inspection, edit, in-rollout checks, and official validation—while omitting repeated file reads and repeated model narration. 

B.1 Pytest: target success with regressions 

Both runs identify the missing serialization of chained exceptions and pass the two target tests. Their patches differ in backward compatibility: the Pi patch replaces the existing longrepr schema for chained exceptions, whereas the evolved sibling extends it. Table 6 exposes where that difference enters the trace and how the official evaluator changes the label. 

Trace stage Pi baseline, attempt 1 Evolved sibling, attempt 1 Run identity pi-mono ; 43 observed tool calls in 355 seconds. OpenCode session/hooks/config/tools with Pi prompt/turn; 54 observed tool calls in 377 sec-onds. Inspection Searches for report serialization, then repeat-edly reads s r c / _ p y t e s t / r e p o r t s . py and 

src/_pytest/_code/code.py . It correctly identifies 

ExceptionChainRepr.chain as the missing infor-mation. Reads the same implementation files and also inspects testing/test_reports.py , including the existing serialization contract that accesses top-level reprtraceback .Patch Changes only s r c / _ p y t e s t / r e p o r t s . py 

(6,400 bytes). For a chained exception, it emits a new longrepr object containing only chain and 

sections .Changes src/_pytest/_code/__init__.py 

and src/_pytest/reports.py (6,854 bytes). It exports ExceptionChainRepr , preserves reprcrash ,

reprtraceback , and sections , and adds the full 

chain .In-rollout checks Writes a custom chained-exception script and observes successful round trips. Attempts to run repository tests stop at the local environment guard requires pytest-2.0 ; the compatibility tests are therefore not closed inside the rollout. Attempts testing/test_reports.py and encounters the same environment guard, then performs custom import and chain round-trip checks. These checks exercise the new path but do not substitute for the official regression set. Official targets Both FAIL_TO_PASS tests pass (2/2). Both FAIL_TO_PASS tests pass (2/2). Official regressions and label 121/123 PASS_TO_PASS tests pass. The two failures, test_xdist_longrepr_to_str_issue_241 

and test_deserialization_failure , raise 

KeyError: reprtraceback . Label: gaps-found ;data role: regression-aware critic negative. 123/123 PASS_TO_PASS tests pass. Label: 

resolved ; data role: clean positive and preference winner. 

Table 6: Condensed Pytest paired trace. Both patches solve the target, but only the evolved sibling preserves the pre-existing serialization schema. 

Decisive Pytest schema difference 

Pi: longrepr = {"chain": chain, "sections": sections} Sibling: longrepr = {"reprcrash": reprcrash, "reprtraceback": reprtraceback, "sections": sections, "chain": chain} 

The official regression failures are therefore not incidental test noise. They directly query a field removed by the Pi patch, even though that patch already passes both newly introduced target tests. This is why the paired trajectories form a useful resolved-versus-regression supervision pair. 

24 HELIX B Verifier-Grounded Case Traces 

B.2 Xarray: a clean semantic near miss 

The Xarray pair holds the OpenCode session/hooks/tools, Pi prompt/turn, and attempt index fixed while changing the config atom. Both patches are clean, single-file edits to the same expression, and both pass their ad hoc checks. Table 7 shows why their official labels nevertheless diverge. 

Trace stage Pi-config sibling, attempt 2 OpenCode-config sibling, attempt 2 Run identity 24 observed tool calls in 130 seconds; 837-byte patch. 27 observed tool calls in 122 seconds; 778-byte patch. Diagnosis Locates where() in xarray/core/computation.py ,traces attribute collection through apply_ufunc ,and reproduces the IndexError for scalar x with 

keep_attrs=True .Locates the same expression and reproduces the same IndexError .Patch If attrs[1] is unavailable, falls back to attrs[0] 

when present, which can be the condition’s at-tributes. If attrs[1] is unavailable, returns an empty dictionary because scalar x has no attributes to preserve. In-rollout checks Runs several direct Python examples and re-ports them as passing; its scalar example uses an attribute-empty condition. The repository test command cannot run because that interpreter has no pytest module. Runs direct Python examples covering scalar and DataArray inputs and reports them as passing. The repository test command encounters the same missing pytest module. Official target The added test_where_attrs case uses condition attributes {’attr’: ’cond’} and scalar x. The patch returns those condition attributes instead of 

{} , so FAIL_TO_PASS is 0/1. The same test receives {} as required, so FAIL_TO_PASS is 1/1. Official regressions and label 247/247 PASS_TO_PASS tests pass. Label: 

gaps-found ; data role: clean semantic negative. 247/247 PASS_TO_PASS tests pass. Label: 

resolved ; data role: clean positive and preference winner. 

Table 7: Condensed Xarray paired trace. Patch hygiene and local examples are matched; the official target isolates the fallback semantic that separates the near miss from the resolved patch. 

Decisive Xarray fallback difference 

Gap: attrs[1] if len(attrs) > 1 else (attrs[0] if len(attrs) == 1 else {}) Resolved: attrs[1] if len(attrs) > 1 else {} 

This pair explains why patch cleanliness alone is insufficient as a training label. The negative is structurally clean and preserves every regression test, yet encodes the wrong fallback semantics for the target behavior. 

25 HELIX References 

## References 

[1] Yuhao Yang, Tianyu Fan, and Chao Huang. CLI-Anything: Towards Agent-Native Computer Use .arXiv:2606.03854, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.03854. [2] Tingyang Chen, Shuo Lu, Kang Zhao, Weicheng Meng, Hanlin Teng, Tianhao Li, Chao Li, Xule Liu, Jian Liang, Zhizhong Zhang, Yuan Xie, Heng Qu, Kun Shao, and Jian Luan. HarnessX: A Composable, Adaptive, and Evolvable Agent Harness Foundry . arXiv:2606.14249v3, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.14249v3. [3] Hyunin Lee, Jinglue Xu, Jeffrey Seely, Donghyun Lee, Matei Zaharia, and Yujin Tang. Recursive Harness Self-Improvement . arXiv:2607.15524, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.15524. [4] Mingguang Chen, Licheng Wang, and Bo Qu. Recursive Self-Improvement in AI: From Bounded Self-Refinement to Autonomous Research Loops . arXiv:2607.07663, 2026. https://arxiv.org/abs/26 07.07663. [5] Jürgen Schmidhuber. Gödel Machines: Self-Referential Universal Problem Solvers Making Provably Optimal Self-Improvements . arXiv:cs/0309048, 2003. https://arxiv.org/abs/cs/0309048. [6] Jenny Zhang, Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, Robert Lange, and Jeff Clune. Darwin Gödel Machine: Open-Ended Evolution of Self-Improving Agents . arXiv:2505.22954, 2025. https://arxiv.org/abs/25 05.22954. [7] Shengran Hu, Cong Lu, and Jeff Clune. Automated Design of Agentic Systems . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. arXiv:2408.08435. https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.084 35. [8] Jiayi Zhang, Jinyu Xiang, Zhaoyang Yu, Fengwei Teng, Xiong-Hui Chen, Jiaqi Chen, Mingchen Zhuge, Xin Cheng, Sirui Hong, Jinlin Wang, Bingnan Zheng, Bang Liu, Yuyu Luo, and Chenglin Wu. AFlow: Automating Agentic Workflow Generation . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. arXiv:2410.10762. https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.10762. [9] Zelong Li, Shuyuan Xu, Kai Mei, Wenyue Hua, Balaji Rama, Om Raheja, Hao Wang, He Zhu, and Yongfeng Zhang. AutoFlow: Automated Workflow Generation for Large Language Model Agents .arXiv:2407.12821, 2024. https://arxiv.org/abs/2407.12821. [10] John Yang, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. SWE-agent: Agent-Computer Interfaces Enable Automated Software Engineering .Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 2024. arXiv:2405.15793. https://arxiv.or g/abs/2405.15793. [11] Naman Jain, King Han, Alex Gu, Wen-Ding Li, Fanjia Yan, Tianjun Zhang, Sida Wang, Armando Solar-Lezama, Koushik Sen, and Ion Stoica. LiveCodeBench: Holistic and Contamination Free Eval-uation of Large Language Models for Code . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. arXiv:2403.07974. https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.07974. [12] Carlos E. Jimenez, John Yang, Alexander Wettig, Shunyu Yao, Kexin Pei, Ofir Press, and Karthik Narasimhan. SWE-bench: Can Language Models Resolve Real-World GitHub Issues? International Conference on Learning Representations, 2024. arXiv:2310.06770. https://arxiv.org/abs/2310.067 70.  

> 26 HELIX References

[13] Jiayi Pan, Xingyao Wang, Graham Neubig, Navdeep Jaitly, Heng Ji, Alane Suhr, and Yizhe Zhang. 

Training Software Engineering Agents and Verifiers with SWE-Gym . Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, PMLR 267:47717–47737, 2025. arXiv:2412.21139. https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/pan25g.html. [14] John Yang, Kilian Lieret, Carlos E. Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kabir Khandpur, Yanzhe Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Ofir Press, Ludwig Schmidt, and Diyi Yang. SWE-smith: Scaling Data for Soft-ware Engineering Agents . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 38, Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2025. arXiv:2504.21798. https://arxiv.org/abs/2504.21798. [15] Hongjin Su, Ruoxi Sun, Jinsung Yoon, Pengcheng Yin, Tao Yu, and Sercan Ö. Arık. Learn-by-interact: A Data-Centric Framework for Self-Adaptive Agents in Realistic Environments . Interna-tional Conference on Learning Representations, 2025. arXiv:2501.10893. https://arxiv.org/abs/25 01.10893. [16] Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. ReAct: Synergizing Reasoning and Acting in Language Models . International Conference on Learning Representations, 2023. arXiv:2210.03629. https://arxiv.org/abs/2210.03629. [17] Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dessì, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Eric Hambro, Luke Zettlemoyer, Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language Models Can Teach Themselves to Use Tools . Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36, 2023. arXiv:2302.04761. https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761. [18] Anomaly. OpenCode source repository . https://github.com/anomalyco/opencode. [19] Earendil Works. Pi Mono source repository . https://github.com/earendil-works/pi. [20] HKUDS. Nanobot source repository . https://github.com/HKUDS/nanobot. [21] Nous Research. Hermes Agent source repository . https://github.com/NousResearch/hermes-agent.