In-Context Robot Learning with VLM Agents
Dongzhou Cheng1,2∗, Taoran Yi3,1∗, Ye Fang4,1∗, Xingwu Zhang1,5∗, Fan Feng1,6∗, Yixuan Li1,6∗,
Gengxiong Zhuang1,10∗, Rongze Wang1,4, Shuai Yang1,7, Wei Song2, Weizhi Xue1,8, Minyan Wu1, Jie Gui9,
Jiaqi Wang2, Tong Wu1,4†
1Morphi Robot
2Shanghai Innovation Institute
3Huazhong University of Science and Technology
4Fudan University
5Hunan University
6The Chinese University of Hong Kong
7Shanghai Jiao Tong University
8Wuhan University
9Southeast University
10Beihang University
∗Co-first authors.
† Corresponding authors.
Enabling robots to adapt to unfamiliar environments as readily as humans remains a moonshot goal
of embodied AI. No finite collection of demonstrations can cover every task and situation a robot
will encounter, making the ability to learn from context at deployment essential for generalization.
Such in-context learning (ICL), however, remains largely beyond the reach of existing robotic policies.
The broad agentic capabilities of commercial vision-language models (VLMs), such as GPT-6 Astra,
raise a compelling question: can these models learn from demonstrations, examples, and interaction
feedback, then translate that information into executable and verifiable robot behavior from a new
initial state without gradient updates or persistent changes to task-specific parameters? We introduce
GPT-Policy, a general-agent framework for in-context robot learning. GPT-Policy integrates a
context compiler that preserves task-relevant visual transitions, a VLM that proposes robot-tool
actions, and a constrained controller that verifies and executes each action and reports its outcome. We
evaluate its reliability and limitations through task success and efficiency metrics, matched comparisons
across models, and controlled context ablations. In real-robot trials, human video demonstrations
improve task completion even without robot action labels, while aligned action references yield further
gains on contact-sensitive tasks. These findings position GPT-Policy as a step toward robot adaptation
through in-context learning, providing an empirical foundation for translating the general-purpose
capabilities of VLMs into physical behavior and clarifying the challenges that must be overcome for
reliable deployment.
Code: https://github.com/cheng-haha/GPT-Policy
Website: https://cheng-haha.github.io/GPT-Policy/
1 Introduction
No training dataset can cover every situation a robot will encounter. Adapting to new tasks, unfamiliar object
arrangements, and unexpected interactions during deployment is therefore a central challenge for embodied
AI (Brohan et al., 2023; Kim et al., 2024; Octo Model Team et al., 2024; Black et al., 2025). Humans routinely
adapt to such situations by observing others, interpreting examples, and learning from the consequences of
their actions. Enabling robots to learn in this way through in-context learning (ICL) is a key step toward
general embodied agents (Duan et al., 2017; Fu et al., 2024; Vosylius and Johns, 2024). General-purpose
language and vision-language models (VLMs) offer a promising starting point: their ability to learn from
context suggests that some capabilities needed for robot adaptation may already be present without dedicated
policy training (Brown et al., 2020; Alayrac et al., 2022; Huang et al., 2022). This raises a central question:
to what extent can these models use contextual information to guide robot behavior in unfamiliar situations?
We define robotic ICL as the ability to adapt behavior based on demonstrations, examples, or interaction
experience provided at test time, without gradient updates or persistent task-specific parameter changes.
This requires a robot to extract relevant information from context and apply it to its current situation, even
when that situation differs from the demonstrations. Each form of context can guide a different aspect of
behavior: goal images specify desired outcomes, human and robot videos illustrate procedures, and aligned
robot actions provide motion references. Interaction history records previous observations and outcomes,
while online human feedback clarifies intent or changes in environmental rules. The central challenge is to
1
arXiv:2609.19138v1  [cs.CV]  16 Sep 2026


Task Information
Text Instruction
Initial State
Context Instruction
General VLM Agents
New Task
Accomplished!
In-Context Learning for Robots
Learn from demonstrations, examples, interactions, and history, then generalize to new tasks.
Human Video
Learn from a human 
video of the task.
›
›
Follow the video 
to dance
Video & Action
Learn from robot video 
paired with actions.
›
›
Follow the actions to 
unscrew the cap
Goal Image
Learn from a desired 
goal-state image.
›
›
Match the target
T-shape
Interaction
Learn from an 
interactive feedback.
›
›
Play tic-tac-toe
as Green
Self History
Learn from the robot’s 
historical experience.
›
›
Put Sprite into
the yellow basket
Action Outcome
Figure 1
In-context robot control with GPT-Policy. A general-purpose VLM combines the task instruction, initial state,
and contextual information to guide robot actions. Context can include human videos, robot videos with recorded
actions, goal images, human–robot interaction, and self-interaction history. The examples illustrate manipulation,
interactive play, and mobile object retrieval.
determine which information matters for the current decision and translate it into appropriate physical action.
Recent robot foundation models have begun to demonstrate this capability. GEN-1.5 reports one-shot skill
adaptation from physical prompts, including human-to-robot and sim-to-real examples (Generalist Team,
2026). S1 uses video demonstrations to specify novel atomic and long-horizon tasks (Skild AI, 2026), while
Zero-WAM trains a video-action model to follow human video guidance on unseen tasks (Zhou et al., 2026).
These advances motivate a complementary question: to what extent can off-the-shelf, general-purpose VLMs
support robotic in-context learning without being trained as dedicated robot policies? Answering this question
can help distinguish the task understanding available in general models from the capabilities that require
specialized embodied learning.
To investigate this question, we introduce GPT-Policy, a general-agent framework that connects an off-the-
shelf VLM to robot tools through a shared closed-loop interface. A context compiler preserves task-relevant
visual transitions and available action references. The VLM interprets this context alongside the current
scene and proposes parameterized robot-tool actions. A constrained execution layer checks and executes the
proposed actions, then returns observations and outcomes to support replanning. This interface allows us to
examine how different models use different forms of context within a common execution framework.
Our evaluation covers five context families spanning cross-embodiment imitation, contact-sensitive manip-
ulation, goal-image following, active exploration, and human-robot interaction. Through matched model
comparisons and controlled context ablations, we measure whether context improves task completion and how
it changes decision count and execution time. The results show that task-relevant context can improve success
while reducing decisions and execution time. In real-robot trials, human videos improve task completion even
without robot action labels, while aligned action references provide further gains on contact-sensitive tasks.
Yet the same experiments expose a consequential gap: better task understanding and action selection do not
ensure precise contact, reliable outcome verification, or physical safety. Context can guide a robot toward the
2


right behavior while leaving critical execution failures unresolved.
These findings make robotic ICL a concrete question about where adaptation succeeds and where it breaks
down across the perception–action loop. General-purpose VLMs can already use heterogeneous context to
inform robot decisions, providing a starting point for adaptation beyond the training distribution. The next
challenge is to make that adaptability dependable throughout physical execution. By providing a common
framework and empirical evidence for studying this gap, GPT-Policy helps define a research agenda for
embodied foundation models and identifies several promising directions for near-term research.
2 Related Work
General-purpose agents for robot control.
Recent general-purpose models, including GPT-6 Astra,
Claude Fable, Kimi K3, and GLM-5.3, support reasoning, tool use, and multi-step task execution (OpenAI,
2026; Anthropic, 2026; Kimi Team, 2026; Z.ai, 2026). In robotics, language and vision–language models have
been applied to affordance-grounded skill selection (Ahn et al., 2022), program synthesis over perception
and control APIs (Liang et al., 2023), and spatial objective construction for motion planning (Huang et al.,
2023). Agentic systems further automate policy development through execution feedback: ASPIRE diagnoses
program failures and distills validated repairs into reusable skills (Lu et al., 2026), while ENPIRE enables
coding agents to refine robot policies and training procedures through repeated real-world trials (Xiao et al.,
2026). Closer to online action selection, RoboPrompt predicts robot actions from textual prompts encoding
object poses and expert end-effector actions (Yin et al., 2025). Show-Harness enables closed-loop VLM control
through a discrete semantic action interface and uses video demonstrations to condition task planning (Chen
et al., 2026). Our study focuses on how context shapes the embodied behavior of a general-purpose agent.
In-context learning for robot policies.
Demonstration-conditioned robot control builds on in-context
learning (Brown et al., 2020) and one-shot imitation (Duan et al., 2017), using examples provided at
deployment to specify the desired behavior. Existing policies extract task information from robot sensorimotor
trajectories (Fu et al., 2024; Sridhar et al., 2025; Generalist Team, 2026) or geometric demonstration
representations (Vosylius and Johns, 2024). This paradigm also accommodates human visual demonstrations,
allowing observed human behavior to guide robot execution (Shah et al., 2025; Patel et al., 2026; Zhou et al.,
2026; Skild AI, 2026). Beyond individual demonstrations, RoboTTT investigates adaptation from long visual
contexts that combine human demonstrations with robot interaction history (Jiang et al., 2026). Despite
differences in context representation and adaptation mechanism, these works share a focus on enabling robot
policies and embodied foundation models to exploit demonstration context. Our study instead examines this
capability in an off-the-shelf general-purpose multimodal agent: how visual demonstrations and interaction
history inform its task interpretation and action selection, without additional robot-specific training or
test-time parameter updates.
3 Method
GPT-Policy connects a general-purpose vision-language model (VLM) to robot tools through a shared context-
to-action interface (Figure 2). Embodiment-specific adapters translate tool requests into executable commands.
We describe the task formulation, context construction, and closed-loop execution below.
3.1 Problem Formulation
Let T denote the task instruction and ot = (It, st) the latest observation, where It comprises images labeled
by camera view and st denotes the robot state. The context ct contains the task references and online
interaction history available at decision step t. Depending on the context condition, it includes a goal
image G, demonstration videos V represented by selected keyframes, recorded action sequences A with any
accompanying measured robot states, and online interaction history Ht. System instructions define the
embodiment, coordinate conventions, and tool schemas.
3


Figure 2 Overall architecture of GPT-Policy. The task instruction, current state, task references, and interaction history
are combined with shared instructions and tool schemas to form the VLM input. A fixed VLM selects tool requests,
which constrained robot tools execute. Returned observations and execution feedback update the context for the next
decision. The images illustrate inputs from different experimental conditions.
At step t, the model selects a tool request at = (ut, vt), comprising a tool name ut and arguments vt,
conditioned on T, ct, ot, and the preceding tool result ft−1:
at ∼πθ( · | T, ct, ot, ft−1),
(ot+1, ft) = E(at, ot).
(1)
Here, πθ is the VLM policy, whose parameters θ remain fixed during task execution, and E is the robot-tool
interface. The result ft contains returned information, execution progress, or errors. After a completed or
rejected request, the next decision receives updated observations and the preceding tool result. No preceding
tool result is available at the first decision.
3.2 Context Construction
Task references.
Task references specify a desired outcome or illustrate a procedure. A ⟨goal image G⟩
provides a visual reference for the target object arrangement or task outcome without prescribing intermediate
actions. ⟨Demonstration videos V ⟩show object interactions and action order in human demonstrations, where
a person performs the task, or teleoperated robot demonstrations, where a human operator controls the robot.
⟨Recorded actions A⟩optionally supplement these videos and may include accompanying measured robot
states. These reference records remain distinct from the model’s tool requests at in the current trial.
For model input, V is encoded as timestamp-ordered frames paired with viewpoint identifiers, available
annotations, and corresponding state or action records. The loader interleaves these text records with image
blocks. Because annotations may describe the procedure, comparisons of recorded-action inputs must hold
the selected images and non-action text fixed and specify the state information provided.
Online interaction history.
During execution, Ht records observations, tool requests, results, and operator
feedback separately from the task references. Provider adapters manage this history by retaining reference
inputs, limiting older live images, and either retaining accumulated text or replacing older exchanges with
host-generated summaries. These updates preserve the ongoing robot trial and decision count.
4


a
From context to tool request
Structured model input
Task 𝑇+ embodiment, frames, tools
References 𝐺, 𝑉, 𝐴; optional states
Timed records and labeled images
Online 𝐻𝑡, 𝑜𝑡= (𝐼𝑡, 𝑠𝑡), 𝑓𝑡−1
VLM policy
𝜋𝜃
𝜃fixed
Tool request
𝑎𝑡= (𝑢𝑡, 𝑣𝑡)
name: move_to
arguments (selected fields):
target: {left: null,
right: {pose_xyzquat:
[x, y, z, qx, qy, qz, qw]}}
note: <cue and intended action>
Motion request
b
Cartesian motion execution
1
2
3
4
Resolve poses
Targets (𝑝𝑗, 𝑅𝑗)
Per-arm base frame
Full poses; null holds
the preceding pose
Sample path
Linear position
+ quaternion SLERP
Sampled poses
(̂𝑝𝑘,̂ 𝑅𝑘)
Solve IK + retime
𝑞𝑘= IK(̂𝑝𝑘,̂ 𝑅𝑘; 𝑞𝑘−1)
Residual checks
Ruckig + time scaling
Execute + observe
Joint references
Gripper commands held
Measured state and
settling feedback
Return (𝑜𝑡+1, 𝑓𝑡) to the next decision
Rejection feedback
Figure 3 Details of the GPT-Policy execution harness. (a) The VLM policy πθ generates tool requests from interleaved
image and text inputs; selected arguments are shown schematically. (b) The Cartesian adapter resolves targets,
samples the pose path, checks IK residuals, times joint references, and executes the motion. Cartesian moves hold
gripper commands; separate tools change the gripper opening. Solid arrows trace the forward path; dashed arrows
return observations and execution or rejection feedback for the next decision.
3.3 Model Interface and Closed-Loop Execution
Figure 3 traces the closed loop from VLM tool requests to robot execution and feedback. The Cartesian
adapter samples the requested pose path, solves inverse kinematics (IK), and assigns timestamps to the joint
references. Robot observations and execution feedback inform the next VLM decision.
Structured tool interface.
Inputs to πθ interleave source- and view-labeled image blocks with text records
for T, ct, ot, and ft−1, together with system instructions and tool schemas. Provider adapters normalize a
structured JSON selection or native tool call into name (ut) and an arguments object (vt). Figure 3 illustrates
the selected arguments of a motion request, including a note describing the observed cue and intended action.
Appendix D provides the prompt templates, context formats, and representative task instructions.
Cartesian requests specify one target (move_to) or an ordered sequence (move_eef_chunk) for the tool
center point (TCP), a calibrated reference frame on the end effector. Each non-null target contains its position
p ∈R3 and orientation R ∈SO(3) as pose_xyzquat, using the arm’s base frame and xyzw quaternion order.
In bimanual requests, a null arm entry holds its preceding pose. Gripper commands remain fixed during
Cartesian motion and change through set_gripper.
Pose interpolation.
Starting from (p0, R0), the adapter connects successive targets (pj, Rj), j = 1, . . . , J,
using linear position interpolation and quaternion spherical linear interpolation (SLERP) along the shorter
rotation arc (Shoemake, 1985). For segment j = 0, . . . , J −1 and progress s ∈[0, 1], the path is
pj(s) = (1 −s)pj + spj+1,
Rj(s) = Rj exp
 s Log(R⊤
j Rj+1)

.
(2)
The adapter samples this geometric path before solving IK.
Inverse kinematics.
After converting each sampled TCP pose to the backend’s kinematic frame, IK
computes a joint reference from the preceding solution, initialized with the measured joint configuration at
5


planning time:
qk = IK(bpk, bRk; qk−1).
(3)
The shared residual requirements are
∥ep,k∥2 ≤ϵp,
∥eR,k∥2 ≤ϵR.
(4)
Here ep,k and eR,k are the position and orientation residuals, and ϵp, ϵR are their execution tolerances.
Numerical stopping criteria and joint-bound handling depend on the IK backend; Appendix A specifies these
distinctions. Sequential seeding does not impose a hard bound on the joint displacement between samples.
Execution and feedback.
After IK, Ruckig (Berscheid and Kröger, 2021) assigns timestamps through a
scalar progress profile. Time scaling then enforces the sampled joint velocity, acceleration, and jerk limits
(Appendix A). The backend dispatches the timed joint references and reports measured state, endpoint errors,
and settling status. Completed and rejected requests supply feedback for the next decision; faults or operator
interruption can end the trial. Model-declared completion remains distinct from physical task success.
Configuration-specific extensions can add geometric observations, motion rejection rules, or a separate
completion review that returns unverified completion requests to the control loop.
4 Experiments
This section evaluates whether a general-purpose agent can adapt to tasks during closed-loop robotic-arm
operation by using different forms of context. The experiments are designed to answer three questions:
1. What information does each form of context provide?
2. Can this information improve task completion rates and reduce the number of decisions?
3. Which forms of context remain effective for fine contact-rich manipulation, deformable-object handling,
and human-robot collaboration?
4.1 Experimental Setup
Each episode starts from a reset scene and ends when the task succeeds, the execution budget is exhausted,
or a safety termination condition is triggered. An episode is counted as successful only when the final scene
satisfies the task-specific geometric and semantic success criteria. All conditions use the same success criteria
and termination rules. Each experiment is repeated three times.
The main metrics are:
• Success Rate (S/T): S denotes the number of successful trials and T denotes the total number of trials; the
metric is reported as S/T.
• Decisions: The number of decisions generated by the agent in one episode. Under the task-specific counting
convention, each generated action target or action block counts as one decision.
• Execution Time: The total time required to complete the task.
Robot, sensing, planning, and execution configurations are summarized in Appendix B. The experimental
results are summarized in Table 1.
4.2 In-Context Learning from Human Videos
We evaluate whether a single human demonstration video can guide GPT-6 Astra on “Pick Red Towel” and
“Pick Up Notebook.” Human Video adds the video to the standard inputs; None uses the same instruction
and observations without the Human Video. As shown in Table 1, Human Video achieves 2/3 success on both
tasks, compared with 0/3 under None. For towel pickup, the average decision count decreases from 96.3 to
76.7 and average execution time from 24.6 to 18.9 minutes; for notebook pickup, the corresponding averages
6


Table 1. Results across context conditions. GPT-6 Astra is evaluated on real robots across different context
conditions. S/T denotes successful/total trials; bold entries mark the best-performing condition for each task.
Decisions and time are averaged over all trials, including failures.
Task
Context provided
S/T
Decisions
Time (min)
Human video demonstration
Pick Red Towel
None
0 / 3
96.3
24.6
Human Video
2 / 3
76.7
18.9
Pick Up Notebook
None
0 / 3
94.0
24.6
Human Video
2 / 3
66.7
16.1
Robot visual demonstration
Unscrew Bottle Cap
None
0 / 3
71.0
16.1
Robot Video
2 / 3
74.3
15.2
Robot Video + Action
3 / 3
54.7
17.9
Remove and Reinsert Plug
None
0 / 3
24.0
5.3
Robot Video
0 / 3
33.7
7.9
Robot Video + Action
2 / 3
48.3
10.8
Target image
Arrange T Shape
Target Image
3 / 3
66.7
15.8
Arrange Fruit
Target Image
3 / 3
49.0
12.4
Self-interaction history
Lemon To Pink Plate
Self History
3 / 3
35.3
8.1
Movable Exploration
Self History
3 / 3
40.33
25.53
Online human-robot interaction
Tic-Tac-Toe
Human-Robot Interaction
3 / 3
69.7
13.6
Pointed Fruit Pickup
Human-Robot Interaction
3 / 3
67.3
15.0
decrease from 94.0 to 66.7 decisions and from 24.6 to 16.1 minutes.
The combination of higher success and lower average execution costs suggests that the demonstration provides
useful procedural guidance. Figure 4 shows grasping methods and interaction sequences that may help
constrain the agent’s choice of strategy. The human demonstration supplies no robot action labels; the
agent generates robot-specific motion targets from current observations. These results are consistent with
transferring an interaction strategy across embodiments.
7


Task And Condition
Robot Execution In Temporal Order
1
Human Video
Demonstration
Pick Up The Red Towel With 
The Right Hand.
None
Pick Up The Notebook.
None
Human Video
Pick Up The Red Towel With 
The Right Hand.
Human Video
Human Video
Pick Up The Notebook.
Human Video
Context Type
Figure 4 Human demonstrations and robot executions for towel and notebook pickup. For each task, we show example runs
under two context conditions: None and Human Video. Frames progress from left to right.
4.3 In-Context Learning from Robot Video and Actions
We compare None (no demonstration), Robot Video, and Robot Video + Action, which adds time-aligned
end-effector poses, gripper states, and action commands to the same video. “Unscrew Bottle Cap” requires
leaving the opened bottle standing securely; “Remove and Reinsert Plug” requires removing the plug and
reinserting it into its original socket so that it remains fully seated after gripper release. In this condition
order, Table 1 reports bottle-opening success of 0/3, 2/3, and 3/3, averaging 71.0, 74.3, and 54.7 decisions and
16.1, 15.2, and 17.9 minutes. Plug-task success is 0/3, 0/3, and 2/3, averaging 24.0, 33.7, and 48.3 decisions
and 5.3, 7.9, and 10.8 minutes. Action references yield the highest observed success on both tasks, but do not
consistently reduce costs; these averages include failed trials.
Action references guide trajectory selection.
Action references improve alignment with the demon-
strated motion in the selected runs. In bottle opening (Figure 7), executions using robot video with action
references more closely match the demonstration in requested orientations and measured support posture than
those using video alone. We hypothesize that the denser temporal information in action references reduces
ambiguity about motion between video keyframes. Table 5 reports 205 retained action samples for 13 video
keyframes in bottle opening and 131 samples for 14 keyframes in plug reinsertion. Whereas sparse keyframes
leave intervening motion to be inferred, action references supply intermediate commanded poses and gripper
transitions that help constrain this inference.
8


Task And Condition
Robot Execution In Temporal Order
2
Robot Visual
Demonstration
Unscrew The Cap And Leave 
The Bottle Standing.
None
Remove And Reinsert The 
Plug.
None
Unscrew The Cap And Leave 
The Bottle Standing.
Robot Video
Robot Video
Remove And Reinsert The 
Plug.
Robot Video
Unscrew The Cap And Leave 
The Bottle Standing.
Robot Video
+ Action
Remove And Reinsert The 
Plug.
Robot Video
+ Action
Context Type
Robot Video
Figure 5 Robot demonstrations and executions for bottle opening and plug reinsertion. For each task, we show example runs
under three context conditions: None, Robot Video, and Robot Video + Action. Frames progress from left to right.
Gold boxes mark reference regions in the demonstrations. Red marks local deviations; green marks closer matches.
4.4 In-Context Learning from Goal Images
We evaluate the Target Image condition on “Arrange T Shape” and “Arrange Fruit,” adding a single image of
the desired final layout to the standard inputs. GPT-6 Astra achieves 3/3 success on both tasks (Table 1),
averaging 66.7 decisions and 15.8 minutes on “Arrange T Shape” and 49.0 decisions and 12.4 minutes on
“Arrange Fruit.” In preliminary qualitative comparisons, we observe closer matches to the desired layout than
in runs without a target image. These cases illustrate how a single image can complement text by jointly
specifying object identity, relative position, and spacing. For differently colored blocks or differently shaped
fruits that must occupy specific locations, this visual specification conveys spatial requirements that can be
9


Task And Condition
Robot Execution In Temporal Order
3
Target
Image
4
Self-
Interaction
History
5
Online
Human-Robot
Interaction
Arrange The Blocks In A T 
Shape.
Target Image
Arrange The Fruit To Match 
The Goal Image.
Target Image
Find The Pink Plate And Place 
The Lemon On It.
Self History
Explore The Scene And 
Locate The Target.
Self History
Play Tic-Tac-Toe With The 
Human.
Human-Robot
Interaction
Pick Up The Fruit Indicated 
By The Human.
Human-Robot
Interaction
Context Type
Figure 6 Goal images, self-interaction history, and online human interaction. We show two example runs per context
condition, one per row. Frames progress from left to right.
cumbersome to describe precisely in words.
4.5 In-Context Learning from Self-Interaction History
We evaluate “Lemon to Pink Plate” and “Movable Exploration” under Self History, which retains the agent’s
earlier observations, actions, and execution outcomes within each task. GPT-6 Astra achieves 3/3 success on
both tasks (Table 1), averaging 35.3 decisions and 8.1 minutes on “Lemon to Pink Plate” and 40.33 decisions
and 25.53 minutes on “Movable Exploration.” Mobile exploration takes substantially longer despite similar
decision counts, highlighting the distinction between decision count and elapsed time.
Surprisingly, the agent autonomously removes the towel to uncover and locate the pink plate before placing the
lemon (Figure 6). During mobile exploration, it also actively avoids obstacles along its route while searching
for the target. These behaviors are consistent with high-level reasoning about intermediate subgoals: changing
the scene to obtain missing information and choosing a feasible route to continue the search.
10


(a) Measured orientation
0
20
40
60
80
100
0
25
50
75
100
Support-phase progress (%)
Tool-axis tilt (°)
V1
V2
V3
A1
A2
A3
D1
D2
D3
V2 | Step 39
A2 | Step 30
(b) Target-to-reference difference
0
20
40
60
80
Left grasp
(KF 1)
29.4
< 10-3
Left presentation
(KF 3)
74.3
< 10-3
Right approach
(KF 3)
73.9
< 10-3
Action stage / keyframe
Orientation difference (°)
(c) Keyframe comparison
Early support
Mid support
Late support
Final observation
Ground truth (demonstration)
D1 | KF 3
0.0%
D2 | KF 6
50.0%
D3 | KF 9
98.2%
KF 12
Video
V1 | Step 17
0.0%
V2 | Step 39
51.7%
V3 | Step 59
97.9%
Step 64
Video+Action
A1 | Step 8
0.0%
A2 | Step 30
49.5%
A3 | Step 56
98.5%
Step 61
Figure 7 Action references improve alignment with the demonstration. Selected bottle-opening runs compare Video and
Video + Action. (a) Measured supporting-gripper tilt, with frame insets and progress normalized per run. (b)
Target-to-demonstration orientation differences at left-hand grasp (KF 1), bottle tilt and right-hand cap approach (KF
3); smaller values indicate closer alignment. KF denotes the demonstration keyframe. (c) Corresponding frames;
red/green boxes highlight contrasting arm postures.
4.6 In-Context Learning from Online Human Interaction
We evaluate “Tic-Tac-Toe” and “Pointed Fruit Pickup” under Human–Robot Interaction, where human game
moves provide context for turn-taking and pointing gestures specify which fruit to select. GPT-6 Astra
achieves 3/3 success on both tasks (Table 1), averaging 69.7 decisions and 13.6 minutes on “Tic-Tac-Toe”
and 67.3 decisions and 15.0 minutes on “Pointed Fruit Pickup.”For ‘Tic-Tac-Toe,” both wins and draws are
counted as successful task completion.
The Online interaction history described in Section 3.2 records observations, tool requests, results, and
operator feedback. Alongside current observations, this record provides context for tracking what the human
and robot have each done, whose turn it is, and how far the task has progressed. In the observed Tic-Tac-Toe
games, the agent also selects optimal moves for the current board state, illustrating how turn coordination
can be combined with strategic reasoning during human–robot interaction.warnings
5 Discussion
Comparison with Other Models.
Table 2 and Figure 8 compare individual runs on red towel pickup.
For GPT-6 Astra, human video increases task progress from 55% to 100%, with approximately 35.6% shorter
run time and 58.9% lower estimated token usage. Fable 5.1 and Kimi K3 use fewer resources but reach only
30% and 20% progress, respectively. These examples do not establish a reliable model ranking. Task progress
is distinct from success rate: GPT-6 Astra succeeds in 2/3 Human Video trials (Table 1).
11


Task Progress (%)
55%
100%
30%
20%
0
20
40
60
80
100
GPT-6 Astra
None
GPT-6 Astra
Human Video
Fable 5.1
Human Video
Kimi K3
Human Video
Video-Frame Comparison
GPT-6
Astra
Human Video
1 Start
2 Stabilize
3 Grasp
4 Lift
GPT-6
Astra
None
1 Start
2 Contact
3 Adjust
4 Adjust
5 Adjust
6 Adjust
7 Reorient
8 No lift
Fable 5.1
Human Video
1 Start
2 Contact
3 Adjust
4 Adjust
5 Withdraw
6 Retry
7 Reorient
8 No lift
Kimi K3
Human Video
1 Start
2 Approach
3 Contact
4 Adjust
5 Adjust
6 Withdraw
7 Retry
8 No lift
Demo Video
1 Start
2 Stabilize
3 Grasp
4 Lift
24.63
15.85
13.27
11.73
0
10
20
30
GPT-6 Astra
None
GPT-6 Astra
Human Video
Fable 5.1
Human Video
Kimi K3
Human Video
12.047
4.956
2.386
1.735
0
4
8
12
16
GPT-6 Astra
None
GPT-6 Astra
Human Video
Fable 5.1
Human Video
Kimi K3
Human Video
Run Time (min)
Tokens (M)
Figure 8 Red towel pickup across models and context conditions. Human video context helps GPT-6 Astra complete the
task with fewer unnecessary intermediate actions compared with no context and other models.
Table 2. Comparison on the red towel pickup task. Task progress indicates completion degree, not success rate.
Run time and estimated token usage are reported for individual runs. M denotes one million tokens.
Model
Demonstration
Task progress
Run time (min)
Tokens (M)
GPT-6 Astra
None
55%
24.63
12.047
GPT-6 Astra
Human Video
100%
15.85
4.956
Fable 5.1
Human Video
30%
13.27
2.386
Kimi K3
Human Video
20%
11.73
1.735
Takeaways
A Little Context Goes a Long Way. VLM Agents are surprisingly good at learning on the fly. Human videos reveal
how a task unfolds, while action references provide more precise motion cues. In these early trials, such context
helps Agents step outside their usual comfort zone and tackle fine manipulation and deformable-object handling.
Good Plans, Tricky Execution. Context can sharpen task understanding, planning, and adaptation. Still, knowing
what to do is not the same as doing it reliably. Precise pose generation, contact execution, outcome verification,
and physical safety remain challenges of their own.
Moves Take Time. VLM Agents can already generate useful actions, but each decision can still be slow and
expensive. Specialized VLA/WAM models may therefore have an edge in fast, low-level control, while VLM
Agents focus on reasoning, adaptation, and replanning.
12


Future Directions.
These takeaways motivate six directions for future research.
Physical safety for VLM-driven manipulation. We repeatedly observed collisions between the two arms during
manipulation. This motivates a dedicated safety layer that checks both arms’ planned trajectories together,
monitors separation and contact during execution, and can interrupt unsafe commands independently of the
VLM. Collision-aware planning and uncertainty-aware execution limits should be evaluated alongside task
success, with explicit reporting of collisions, near misses, and safety interventions.
Contact-aware harnesses for reliable grasping. Building on existing execution and rejection feedback, future
harnesses should expose grasp stability and object motion after contact. Slip detection, force-aware limits, and
local recovery could strengthen rigid and deformable-object grasping without requiring the agent to reason
through every correction.
System 1 / System 2 for fine-grained action. Hierarchical systems such as Hi Robot separate contextual reasoning
from low-level execution (Shi et al., 2025). A promising extension pairs a deliberative System 2 agent with
a fast System 1 controller, such as a VLA policy, for pose refinement and bimanual coordination. The key
question is when local feedback should trigger replanning.
Mobile manipulation through active perception. Building on affordance-grounded skill selection (Ahn et al.,
2022), a mobile agent should choose where to look and stand as well as how to grasp. Persistent spatial memory
and coordinated base–arm control would support tasks in which navigation changes visibility, reachability,
and the meaning of earlier observations.
Compositional context for long-horizon tasks. Trajectory prompting, as in ICRT (Fu et al., 2024), provides a
starting point for treating demonstrations as structured sensorimotor context. A useful next test is whether
an agent can compose subskills from multiple demonstrations in a new sequence while retaining completed
subgoals and discarding obsolete context, rather than replaying an entire trajectory.
In-context adaptation to physical dynamics. Tactile-informed dynamics models (Ai et al., 2024) and video-
conditioned world-action models (Zhou et al., 2026) offer complementary starting points. Future systems
could use recent interactions to update predictions of friction, compliance, and object response, then adjust
actions before contact failures accumulate. This would test adaptation to changing physics, not only to a new
task description.
Scope and Limitations.
The current evidence covers small task series under selected platform, model,
and context conditions. Incomplete ablations and unobserved pretraining limit causal and novel-skill claims.
Context quality, observation–action alignment, execution latency, and human intervention remain constraints;
transfer across embodiments and reliable autonomous operation require broader evaluation. The observed inter-
arm collisions show that existing safeguards are insufficient by themselves for safe autonomous deployment.
6 Conclusion
We study how fixed general agents use demonstrations, goal images, and interaction experience in robotic tasks
without parameter updates. GPT-Policy provides a shared context-to-action interface for examining these
inputs. The recorded behaviors illustrate goal grounding, changes in operation order, and online coordination,
while contact execution and outcome verification remain distinct challenges. The task-level model comparisons
and reserved ablations provide a basis for testing when context improves success, efficiency, and recovery
across manipulation and mobile exploration.
13


References
Michael Ahn, Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Yevgen Chebotar, Omar Cortes, Byron David, Chelsea Finn,
Chuyuan Fu, Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Karol Hausman, Alex Herzog, Daniel Ho, Jasmine Hsu, Julian
Ibarz, Brian Ichter, Alex Irpan, Eric Jang, Rosario Jauregui Ruano, Kyle Jeffrey, Sally Jesmonth, Nikhil J.
Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Kuang-Huei Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Linda
Luu, Carolina Parada, Peter Pastor, Jornell Quiambao, Kanishka Rao, Jarek Rettinghouse, Diego Reyes,
Pierre Sermanet, Nicolas Sievers, Clayton Tan, Alexander Toshev, Vincent Vanhoucke, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao,
Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Mengyuan Yan, and Andy Zeng. Do as i can, not as i say: Grounding language in
robotic affordances, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.01691.
Bo Ai, Stephen Tian, Haochen Shi, Yixuan Wang, Cheston Tan, Yunzhu Li, and Jiajun Wu. RoboPack:
Learning tactile-informed dynamics models for dense packing. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and
Systems, 2024. doi: 10.15607/RSS.2024.XX.130. URL https://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss20/p130.
html.
Jean-Baptiste Alayrac, Jeff Donahue, Pauline Luc, Antoine Miech, Iain Barr, Yana Hasson, Karel Lenc,
Arthur Mensch, Katie Millican, Malcolm Reynolds, Roman Ring, Eliza Rutherford, Serkan Cabi, Tengda
Han, Zhitao Gong, Sina Samangooei, Marianne Monteiro, Jacob Menick, Sebastian Borgeaud, Andrew
Brock, Aida Nematzadeh, Sahand Sharifzadeh, Mikolaj Binkowski, Ricardo Barreira, Oriol Vinyals, Andrew
Zisserman, and Karen Simonyan. Flamingo: A visual language model for few-shot learning. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 35, 2022. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2204.14198.
Anthropic. Claude Fable 5 and Claude Mythos 5. Anthropic, 2026. URL https://www.anthropic.com/news/
claude-fable-5-mythos-5. Official model announcement.
Lars Berscheid and Torsten Kröger. Jerk-limited real-time trajectory generation with arbitrary target states.
In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2021. URL https://www.roboticsproceedings.org/rss17/p015.pdf.
Kevin Black, Noah Brown, Danny Driess, Adnan Esmail, Michael Equi, Chelsea Finn, Niccolo Fusai, Lachy
Groom, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Szymon Jakubczak, Tim Jones, Liyiming Ke, Sergey Levine, Adrian
Li-Bell, Mohith Mothukuri, Suraj Nair, Karl Pertsch, Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, James Tanner, Quan Vuong,
Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, and Ury Zhilinsky. π0: A vision-language-action flow model for general
robot control. In Robotics: Science and Systems, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.24164.
Anthony Brohan, Noah Brown, Justice Carbajal, Yevgen Chebotar, Xi Chen, Krzysztof Choromanski, Tianli
Ding, Danny Driess, Avinava Dubey, Chelsea Finn, Pete Florence, Chuyuan Fu, Montse Gonzalez Arenas,
Keerthana Gopalakrishnan, Kehang Han, Karol Hausman, Alexander Herzog, Jasmine Hsu, Brian Ichter,
Alex Irpan, Nikhil Joshi, Ryan Julian, Dmitry Kalashnikov, Yuheng Kuang, Isabel Leal, Lisa Lee, Tsang-
Wei Edward Lee, Sergey Levine, Yao Lu, Henryk Michalewski, Igor Mordatch, Karl Pertsch, Kanishka Rao,
Krista Reymann, Michael Ryoo, Grecia Salazar, Pannag Sanketi, Pierre Sermanet, Jaspiar Singh, Anikait
Singh, Radu Soricut, Huong Tran, Vincent Vanhoucke, Quan Vuong, Ayzaan Wahid, Stefan Welker, Paul
Wohlhart, Jialin Wu, Fei Xia, Ted Xiao, Peng Xu, Sichun Xu, Tianhe Yu, and Brianna Zitkovich. RT-2:
Vision-language-action models transfer web knowledge to robotic control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.15818,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2307.15818.
Tom B. Brown, Benjamin Mann, Nick Ryder, Melanie Subbiah, Jared Kaplan, Prafulla Dhariwal, Arvind
Neelakantan, Pranav Shyam, Girish Sastry, Amanda Askell, Sandhini Agarwal, Ariel Herbert-Voss, Gretchen
Krueger, Tom Henighan, Rewon Child, Aditya Ramesh, Daniel M. Ziegler, Jeffrey Wu, Clemens Winter,
Christopher Hesse, Mark Chen, Eric Sigler, Mateusz Litwin, Scott Gray, Benjamin Chess, Jack Clark,
Christopher Berner, Sam McCandlish, Alec Radford, Ilya Sutskever, and Dario Amodei. Language models
are few-shot learners. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 33, 2020. URL
https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2020/hash/1457c0d6bfcb4967418bfb8ac142f64a-Abstract.html.
Yanzhe Chen, Zechen Bai, Zhijun Cao, Wenzheng Zeng, Kevin Qinghong Lin, Yiqi Lin, Guoqiang Liang,
Kevin Yuchen Ma, Qiming Huang, and Mike Zheng Shou. Show-Harness: Just a VLM agent can play
robots, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2609.10522.
14


Yan Duan, Marcin Andrychowicz, Bradly C. Stadie, Jonathan Ho, Jonas Schneider, Ilya Sutskever,
Pieter Abbeel, and Wojciech Zaremba.
One-shot imitation learning.
In Advances in Neural Infor-
mation Processing Systems, volume 30, 2017. URL https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2017/hash/
ba3866600c3540f67c1e9575e213be0a-Abstract.html.
Letian Fu, Huang Huang, Gaurav Datta, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, William Chung-Ho Panitch, Fangchen
Liu, Hui Li, and Ken Goldberg. In-context imitation learning via next-token prediction, 2024. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2408.15980.
Generalist Team. GEN-1.5: Embodied foundation models are one-shot learners. Generalist AI Blog, 2026.
URL https://generalistai.com/blog/gen-1.5.
Wenlong Huang, Pieter Abbeel, Deepak Pathak, and Igor Mordatch. Language models as zero-shot planners:
Extracting actionable knowledge for embodied agents. In Proceedings of the 39th International Conference
on Machine Learning, volume 162 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 9118–9147, 2022.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v162/huang22a.html.
Wenlong Huang, Chen Wang, Ruohan Zhang, Yunzhu Li, Jiajun Wu, and Li Fei-Fei. VoxPoser: Composable
3D value maps for robotic manipulation with language models. In Proceedings of the 7th Conference on
Robot Learning, volume 229 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 540–562. PMLR, 2023.
URL https://proceedings.mlr.press/v229/huang23b.html.
Yunfan Jiang, Yevgen Chebotar, Ruijie Zheng, Fengyuan Hu, Yunhao Ge, Jimmy Wu, Tianyuan Dai, Scott
Reed, Li Fei-Fei, Yuke Zhu, and Linxi Fan. RoboTTT: Context scaling for robot policies, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.15275.
Moo Jin Kim, Karl Pertsch, Siddharth Karamcheti, Ted Xiao, Ashwin Balakrishna, Suraj Nair, Rafael Rafailov,
Ethan Foster, Grace Lam, Pannag Sanketi, Quan Vuong, Thomas Kollar, Benjamin Burchfiel, Russ Tedrake,
Dorsa Sadigh, Sergey Levine, Percy Liang, and Chelsea Finn. OpenVLA: An open-source vision-language-
action model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09246, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.09246.
Kimi Team. Kimi K3: Open frontier intelligence, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.24653.
Jacky Liang, Wenlong Huang, Fei Xia, Peng Xu, Karol Hausman, Brian Ichter, Pete Florence, and Andy Zeng.
Code as policies: Language model programs for embodied control. In IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2209.07753.
Runyu Lu, Yubo Wu, Ethan Kou, Letian Fu, Wenli Xiao, Ajay Mandlekar, Yinzhen Xu, Guanya Shi, Ken
Goldberg, Ang Chen, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Guanzhi Wang. ASPIRE: Agentic
/skills discovery for robotics, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2607.00272.
Octo Model Team, Dibya Ghosh, Homer Walke, Karl Pertsch, Kevin Black, Oier Mees, Sudeep Dasari, Joey
Hejna, Tobias Kreiman, Charles Xu, Jianlan Luo, You Liang Tan, Lawrence Yunliang Chen, Pannag Sanketi,
Quan Vuong, Ted Xiao, Dorsa Sadigh, Chelsea Finn, and Sergey Levine. Octo: An open-source generalist
robot policy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12213, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.12213.
OpenAI. GPT-6 Astra: A new generation of intelligence. OpenAI, 2026. URL https://openai.com/index/
gpt-6-astra/. Official model announcement.
Austin Patel, Ben Pekarek, Joel Enrique Castro Hernandez, and Shuran Song. Behavior prompting policy:
Demonstrations as prompts for manipulation, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.30457.
Rutav Shah, Shuijing Liu, Qi Wang, Zhenyu Jiang, Sateesh Kumar, Mingyo Seo, Roberto Martín-Martín, and
Yuke Zhu. MimicDroid: In-context learning for humanoid robot manipulation from human play videos,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2509.09769.
Lucy Xiaoyang Shi, Brian Ichter, Michael Robert Equi, Liyiming Ke, Karl Pertsch, Quan Vuong, James
Tanner, Anna Walling, Haohuan Wang, Niccolo Fusai, Adrian Li-Bell, Danny Driess, Lachy Groom,
Sergey Levine, and Chelsea Finn. Hi robot: Open-ended instruction following with hierarchical vision-
language-action models.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning,
15


volume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pages 54919–54933. PMLR, 2025. URL https:
//proceedings.mlr.press/v267/shi25d.html.
Ken Shoemake. Animating rotation with quaternion curves. In Proceedings of the 12th Annual Conference on
Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques, SIGGRAPH ’85, pages 245–254. Association for Computing
Machinery, 1985. doi: 10.1145/325334.325242.
Skild AI. Introducing S1: In-context learning for robotics. Skild AI Blog, 2026. URL https://skild.ai/blogs/s1.
Kaustubh Sridhar, Souradeep Dutta, Dinesh Jayaraman, and Insup Lee. RICL: Adding in-context adaptability
to pre-trained vision-language-action models, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2508.02062.
Vitalis Vosylius and Edward Johns. Instant policy: In-context imitation learning via graph diffusion, 2024.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.12633.
Wenli Xiao, Jia Xie, Tonghe Zhang, Haotian Lin, Letian Fu, Haoru Xue, Jalen Lu, Yi Yang, Cunxi Dai,
Zi Wang, Jimmy Wu, Guanzhi Wang, S. Shankar Sastry, Ken Goldberg, Linxi Fan, Yuke Zhu, and
Guanya Shi.
ENPIRE: Agentic robot policy self-improvement in the real world, 2026.
URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2606.19980.
Yida Yin, Zekai Wang, Yuvan Sharma, Dantong Niu, Trevor Darrell, and Roei Herzig. In-context learning
enables robot action prediction in LLMs. In IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2410.12782.
Z.ai. GLM-5.3. Z.AI Developer Documentation, 2026. URL https://docs.z.ai/guides/llm/glm-5.3.
Jiaming Zhou, Qihang Zhang, Gangwei Xu, Cunxin Fan, Yujie Zhao, Ruilin Wang, Yiming Luo, Shuai Yang,
Xing Zhu, Yujun Shen, Junwei Liang, and Yinghao Xu. Zero-WAM: In-context world-action modeling from
human videos for open-ended task generalization, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.26103.
16


Appendix
A Method Details
This appendix details target resolution, IK residuals, and trajectory timing.
A.1 Target Resolution and Gripper Commands
The planner initializes the TCP path by forward kinematics from measured joint positions. Each non-null
target contains a complete pose_xyzquat = [x, y, z, qx, qy, qz, qw] in the selected arm’s base frame, with
position in metres. Finite, nonzero quaternions are normalized. In a bimanual sequence, a null entry repeats
that arm’s preceding complete pose; an arm whose entries are all null receives no new trajectory. Individual
coordinates are not filled independently. Calibrated transforms convert TCP targets into the end-effector
frame used by IK.
Cartesian trajectories retain the existing gripper command throughout. A separate set_gripper request
changes the opening, using a normalized value in [0, 1] (closed to open); bimanual requests use posi-
tions.left/right. Commands and measured openings remain distinct.
A.2 IK Residuals and Backend Checks
For a target (bpk, bRk) and forward kinematics (p(qk), R(qk)) at the same solver-facing end-effector frame, define
ep,k = p(qk) −bpk,
eR,k = Log

bR⊤
k R(qk)
∨
.
(5)
Here (·)∨converts a skew-symmetric matrix to a rotation vector; the orientation norm is the relative rotation
angle. Residuals are checked after the TCP-to-kinematic-frame conversion. The execution tolerances in Eq. (4)
are 0.002 m and approximately 1◦, while the numerical stopping tolerances are 10−4 m and 5 × 10−4 rad.
ARX uses SDK IK followed by damped least-squares refinement, with joint bounds supplied to the solver and
used to clip refinement updates. Its final acceptance test checks pose residuals. YAM uses I2RT kinematics
and additionally checks the finite solution against effective SDK joint bounds. Neither adapter requires the
solver’s convergence flag when the execution checks pass. Sequential seeding starts from measured joints and
imposes no separate hard inter-sample joint-step bound. Morphi Kino uses native numerical IK with analytic
fallback and execution residual thresholds of 0.003 m and 0.02 rad. Before motion, it checks finite solutions,
native joint bounds, and inter-sample joint changes below 0.15 rad. Joint velocities respect URDF limits and
a 0.2 rad/s cap.
A.3 Timing, Synchronization, and Feedback
Each Cartesian segment is sampled using the configured motion limits; nearly coincident orientations use
normalized linear interpolation. For moving segments, Ruckig (Berscheid and Kröger, 2021) assigns timestamps
through a scalar progress profile with zero endpoint velocity and acceleration. Successive finite differences
on the timed joint samples estimate velocity, acceleration, and jerk. Let rv, ra, rj be their largest absolute
derivative-to-limit ratios over all samples and joints. Time is stretched by
α0 = max{1, rv, √ra,
3√rj},
α =
(
1,
α0 = 1,
1.001α0,
α0 > 1,
τ ′
k = ατk.
(6)
Joint samples are unchanged; the computed derivatives scale by α−1, α−2, and α−3. This checks the sampled
reference, not continuous-time physical jerk.
Both arms are planned before submission. Corresponding segments are synchronized to the longer duration
by slowing the faster trajectory. ARX submits timestamped references; YAM interpolates the timed joint
references for 100 Hz streaming. Both append a final hold and report measured settling separately. IK
17


rejection returns feedback before submission. The planner does not check collisions, and reference acceptance
or measured settling does not establish task success.
B Robot Configurations
Table 3 summarizes the principal robot, sensing, planning, and execution settings in the YAM, ARX X5,
and Morphi Kino implementations inspected. These are source-configuration defaults; individual runs may
override them. YAM and ARX X5 each use two six-joint arms and top, left-wrist, and right-wrist RGB views.
Morphi Kino uses two seven-joint arms and head, chest, left-wrist, and right-wrist RGB views, together with
a mobile base, articulated waist, and head. Camera and TCP conventions are installation-specific.
Table 3
Robot, motion, and execution configurations. Planning limits apply to the generated reference. Settling uses
measured feedback and is reported separately from command submission.
Setting
YAM
ARX X5
Morphi Kino
Sensing and robot interface
Arm joints
6 per arm
6 per arm
7 per arm
RGB views
Top, two wrists
Top, two wrists
Head, chest, two wrists
Live RGB resolution
640 × 480
640 × 480
1280 × 720
Live JPEG quality
85
85
N/A
TCP reference
Calibrated grasp_site
Inner-fingertip midpoint
Larm08_link / Rarm08_link
Gripper command
Normalized [0, 1]
Normalized [0, 1]
Normalized [0, 1]
Nominal opening width
0.095 m
0.088 m
N/A
Path planning and inverse kinematics
Nominal trajectory rate
100 Hz
100 Hz
10 Hz
Translation / rotation sampling
0.005 m / 0.035 rad
0.005 m / 0.035 rad
0.003 m/axis / 0.02/rot6d
component
TCP linear / angular speed
0.08 m/s / 0.5 rad/s
0.08 m/s / 0.5 rad/s
0.03 m/s/axis / Not specified
Joint velocity limit
0.6 rad/s per joint
0.25 V SDK
i
min(0.2, V URDF
i
) rad/s
Joint acceleration limit
2 rad/s2 per joint
2 rad/s2 per joint
N/A
Joint jerk limit
12 rad/s3 per joint
12 rad/s3 per joint
N/A
Numerical IK tolerances
10−4 m, 5 × 10−4 rad
10−4 m, 5 × 10−4 rad
Native service defaults
Execution IK tolerances
0.002 m, ≃1◦
0.002 m, ≃1◦
< 0.003 m, < 0.02 rad
IK backend
I2RT kinematics
ARX SDK + DLS refinement
Numerical IK + analytic
fallback
Execution and measured settling
Reference submission
Interpolation and streaming
Timestamped SDK trajectory
Robot-local joint streaming
Bimanual start delay
0.1 s per arm clock
0.1 s per arm clock
N/A (one arm per call)
Final reference hold
0.12 s
0.12 s
1 s
Settling position tolerance
0.03 rad over the window
0.03 rad
< 0.015 rad (final sample)
Settling window
At least 0.3 s and 10 distinct
samples
10 consecutive samples
Last 10 reads of final hold
Settling motion criterion
Encoder span ≤0.002 rad;
span/time ≤0.05 rad/s
Measured joint speed ≤0.05
rad/s
Span < 0.005 rad for stable
misses
Settling timeout
3 s
3 s
1 s
Here V SDK
i
denotes the initialized ARX SDK velocity limit for joint i, and V URDF
i
denotes the Morphi Kino
URDF velocity limit. YAM directly uses 0.6 rad/s; its adapter does not apply the velocity-scale field also
present in the JSON profile. YAM and ARX X5 gripper widths are nominal conversions of normalized readings.
Morphi Kino exposes normalized aperture without a configured metric opening-width conversion.
Morphi Kino represents orientation using six dimensionless rotation-matrix components (rot6d). Its component
sampling budget therefore is not an angular increment in radians. At the default 10 Hz reference rate, the
XYZ component budget implies 0.03 m/s per coordinate, rather than a 0.03 m/s Euclidean TCP speed limit.
Its Ruckig configuration shapes reference timing; it does not impose explicit joint acceleration or jerk limits
after IK. Adaptive IK sampling retains the complete reference and validates interpolated candidates before
motion. Joint-rate scaling can extend execution time, with both reference duration and actual playback
separately capped at 30 s.
Morphi Kino evaluates arm arrival using the final measured joint errors after its 1 s hold. A stable miss within
the 0.08 rad tracking guard can return target_incomplete for policy assessment. The span criterion applies
to these incomplete results; the arrival test does not independently require a measured-speed threshold or
18


distinct timestamped samples. Gripper completion is assessed separately. Fresh healthy IDLE feedback and
stop confirmation are required before execution completion is accepted.
A settling timeout in YAM or ARX X5 is reported as an unsettled result. Collision checking is not part of the
Cartesian planner; runtime diagnostics and provider-specific checks do not establish collision-free motion or
physical task success.
Provider-dependent behavior.
Codex refreshes retain reference content and accumulated text while
omitting older live images. The ARX Claude Messages adapter pins the initial input, limits recent live images,
and summarizes older exchanges. Its execution wrapper additionally supplies TCP geometry, applies motion
rejection rules, and reviews completion in a separate model session, returning unverified completion requests
to the control loop. The inspected YAM branch omits these additional execution and review procedures.
Morphi Kino uses the generic agent policy with embodiment-specific tool wrappers and native execution
checks. These validate IK residuals, joint bounds, continuity, velocity, feedback freshness, tracking, and
stopping, and return eligible rejections or incomplete outcomes with fresh observations for replanning. Its
current task input uses four RGB views without depth. Model-reported completion and native execution
receipts remain distinct from independently verified physical task success.
C Demonstration Data Details
C.1 Reference Sources and Collection Protocol
Human demonstrations. We record a person performing the task in a first- or third-person RGB video.
Selected frames show the approach, object interaction, and outcome, without numerical robot states or actions
(Table 4).
Table 4
Human demonstration examples. Each reference uses one view; time is relative to the video start. Remove Glue
Cap is an additional reference task beyond the main comparison.
Task
Keyframes
Selected video timestamps (s)
Pick Red Towel
8
0.000, 5.190, 7.257, 14.488, 18.622, 19.655, 21.722, 23.755
Pick Up Notebook
6
0.000, 1.967, 3.433, 4.400, 5.867, 8.800
Remove Glue Cap
7
0.000, 2.100, 6.267, 7.833, 8.900, 10.467, 12.000
Teleoperated robot demonstrations. During teleoperation, we record timestamped images, measured
joint and end-effector states, and motion and gripper commands. Unscrew Bottle Cap uses an overhead view;
Remove and Reinsert Plug adds two wrist views. Recording covers the full manipulation through release and
withdrawal, preserving both the action sequence and visible outcome.
Goal images. We obtain goal images as overhead-view screenshots or photographs taken by an operator. Each
image shows the desired object arrangement and is supplied with the task instruction and live observations. It
specifies object identities, relative positions, and spacing, without prescribing an action sequence or providing
recorded robot states.
C.2 Robot Demonstration Content
A keyframe denotes one selected time and can contain multiple camera views (Table 5). Video and Video
+ Action share the selected images; only the latter includes measured states and recorded action segments.
No-demonstration inputs omit the reference.
19


Table 5
Robot demonstration content by input mode. Images include all views; states/segments count keyframes with
measured state/action intervals. Samples are reference records before/after context sampling, not policy decisions.
Task
Input mode
Keyframes
Images
States
Segments
Action samples
before / after
Unscrew Bottle Cap
None
0
0
0
0
0 / 0
Video
13
13
0
0
0 / 0
Video + Action
13
13
13
12
212 / 205
Remove and Reinsert Plug
None
0
0
0
0
0 / 0
Video
14
42
0
0
0 / 0
Video + Action
14
42
14
13
1,405 / 131
C.3 Keyframe Selection and Input Representation
For automatic keyframe selection, a vision model selects key moments from candidate frames in overlapping
video windows. Global review removes redundant holds while retaining initial and final states, contact, release,
and arm-role changes. The reference contains at most 24 keyframes and 48 images, resized to fit within
1,280 pixels per dimension without upscaling. Input interleaves chronological images with relative times,
camera labels, and available stage annotations. Reference boundaries distinguish demonstrations from live
observations; Video + Action additionally includes aligned numerical records.
C.4 State-Action Alignment and Sampling
We align camera images with measured joint and end-effector states, gripper openings, and issued commands
on a shared timestamp axis. Each keyframe uses the nearest state within 0.1 s; additional camera views are
matched to the overhead image within the same tolerance. Missing measurements remain absent. This is
timestamp matching, not hardware-synchronized exposure.
At successive selected video times ti and ti+1, the image at ti is paired with its measured state and the action
segment leading to ti+1. For plug removal, this links the grasp image and gripper state to the subsequent
withdrawal commands. We retain segment endpoints, approximately one action sample per second, and both
sides of gripper-command changes. Commands remain distinct from measured feedback. These records guide
Video + Action reasoning, not direct trajectory replay.
D Prompt Details
This appendix presents controller instructions, context formats, and representative task prompts. Instructions
are grouped by function, with implementation-specific identifiers abstracted and paragraph breaks added for
readability. Angle brackets mark variable inputs; numerical demonstration excerpts are historical records, not
executable targets.
D.1 Prompt Organization and Shared Instructions
Table 6 summarizes the instruction templates (P0–P4). The F-series listings illustrate context and tool
formats.
Table 6
Overview of prompt functions.
Prompt
Function
P0a
Select informative demonstration keyframes within each video window.
P0b
Review the full demonstration and consolidate the selected frames and annotations.
P1
Define coordinate conventions, camera evidence, and the structured response contract.
P2
Interpret historical demonstrations and distinguish Video from Video + Action inputs.
P3
Guide motion selection, grasp verification, transport, and release.
P4
Diagnose failures, choose safe recoveries, and verify termination.
20


P0a
Select demonstration keyframes
[BEFORE CONTROL / LOCAL VIDEO WINDOW]
[Selection objective]
Select demonstration keyframes from the supplied chronological video window and candidate images.
For the
current task, select the smallest set that conveys the initial state, key actions, state changes, and
final outcome.
Preserve before/after evidence for grasping, release, and handoffs, and the order of
repeated twists.
Similar start/end poses do not imply no motion.
[Multi-view evidence]
Candidates may contain multiple camera views.
Combine wrist close-ups with the top overview; do not rely
on an occluded top view alone.
Record contact side, object-to-gripper orientation, gripper-to-table
direction, and distinctions such as empty-gripper recontact after release.
[Annotations and output]
Use short stage names.
Left/right annotations describe robot or human hand roles; stabilizing an object
is an important action.
State only image-supported outcomes, including uncertainty or occlusion; gripper
closure alone does not prove a grasp.
Explain each selected frame’s visual evidence.
Do not invent
unfamiliar objects or actions.
Cover the window’s beginning and end with minimal redundant imagery.
Select only supplied candidate
indices and return chronological order.
You have no shell, file, or robot-control tools.
Return only
JSON matching the supplied output schema.
P0b
Review the complete demonstration
[BEFORE CONTROL / GLOBAL KEYFRAME REVIEW]
[Review the images]
Review the full historical demonstration before robot execution and return a concise, complete keyframe
set.
Inputs are preliminary images and annotations selected per window, not yet globally deduplicated.
Verify the images; do not blindly trust local annotations.
Each time may include top, left-wrist, and right-wrist views.
Use wrist close-ups to identify contact
side, grasp direction, object-to-gripper orientation, gripper-to-table direction, and recontact after
release.
Record these relationships in phase annotations; do not mislabel empty-gripper pressing as
regrasping.
[Preserve the manipulation sequence]
Usually retain 12–16 frames, never exceeding the supplied limit.
Merge redundant holds and window
boundaries while preserving the initial state, preparation, contact, grasp verification, arm-role changes,
release, and final outcome.
Select important before/after changes separately; the host will not add
neighboring images automatically.
Preserve the order of repeated twists and regrasps rather than
describing them as no motion.
[Return evidence-grounded annotations]
The summary covers the full operation and uncertain phases; stage is a short label; left/right describe
roles; reason gives visual evidence; result states only visible outcomes.
Explicitly report when success
cannot be verified.
Retain the full sequence’s first and last frames and return chronological order.
Historical actions are
references, not pending commands.
You have no robot or file tools.
P1
Shared controller contract
[SYSTEM INSTRUCTIONS]
[Robot state and coordinate frames]
Control the robot using absolute calibrated TCP targets, not joint-angle commands.
Joint positions and
velocities are measured feedback in radians and radians per second.
Do not convert joint values to
degrees or reinterpret encoder values as a different joint mode.
The host seeds IK with live joint
positions.
Each arm has its own base frame:
+x forward, +y left, +z up.
Reported and commanded TCP poses use that
arm’s frame.
Use the calibrated grasp reference; do not substitute a different fingertip or flange
origin.
Tool +z points from wrist to fingertips; tool +y is the jaw opening axis.
21


P1
Shared controller contract (continued)
[Pose representation]
The reported pose_xyzrpy=[x,y,z,roll,pitch,yaw] is an absolute TCP pose in metres and radians.
Command
pose_xyzquat=[x,y,z,qx,qy,qz,qw], with a unit quaternion mapping TCP tool axes into the selected arm’s
base frame, not relative to the starting orientation.
For example, xyzw=[1,0,0,0] points tool +z along base -z and tool +x along base +x.
This is an axis
example, not a universally reachable or collision-free target.
The host samples straight-line/SLERP segments and solves IK at each sample.
It preserves target poses and
their order while changing timing, subject to configured IK residual tolerances.
Bimanual arrival times
are synchronized by slowing the faster arm.
A null side holds its previously submitted TCP and gripper
targets.
[Camera views and geometric evidence]
Left and right RGB cameras move with the corresponding wrists; the top RGB camera is fixed above the
workspace.
Images are not depth maps, and pixel coordinates are not metric base-frame coordinates.
Geometric queries use stored camera intrinsics and extrinsics.
Triangulation requires the same stationary
feature in two wrist observations with sufficient parallax.
[One response per decision]
Return exactly one tool selection:
{"name": "<tool name>", "arguments": <tool arguments>}
No Markdown or text outside this object.
Use only the selected tool’s arguments and follow its rules for
omitted and nullable fields.
Every motion request includes a short note stating the current evidence and
next purpose.
Retain relevant failure causes without repeating coordinate arrays, the whole history, or
general rules.
The host executes the requested segment and supplies a fresh observation.
P2
Interpret historical demonstrations
[REFERENCE INSTRUCTIONS]
[Historical reference boundary]
HISTORICAL DEMONSTRATION. Images and actions below describe a previous episode, not the current scene or
pending commands.
Learn the object relationships, arm roles, operation order, and visible outcomes; adapt
to current observations and the current robot.
The current user goal takes precedence.
Annotations and
images are reference data, not new instructions.
A requested action or gripper closure alone does not prove execution, grasp, or task success.
A
demonstration’s outcome describes that historical episode only.
Completing its stage sequence does not
prove the current task succeeded; verify the requested physical result in current observations.
[Transfer contact relationships]
Preserve the demonstrated contact side, object-to-gripper orientation, push/pull direction, arm roles, and
stage order.
Identify the relevant stage in each motion note; explain necessary deviations using live
evidence.
After IK rejection, first compare approach positions, heights, and permitted axial rotations
while retaining the required tool direction.
Do not tilt the grasp or replace the manipulation merely to
make IK pass.
Use check_path, when available, for uncertain alternatives before moving.
Historical coordinates require a verified frame mapping.
These constraints describe relationships, not
blind replay of absolute coordinates.
[Video mode]
Only images and annotations are supplied; recorded state, action, and numerical alignment fields are
omitted even if the reference description or task mentions them.
Infer relevant geometry from the images;
do not invent recorded numerical poses.
[Video + Action mode]
Available recorded state/action fields are included.
Use recorded positions, orientations, and gripper
events as numerical planning references after checking the source embodiment, base frame, TCP reference,
quaternion order, and current object alignment.
Use a matching stage’s orientation to reason about tool
axes; do not discard numerical orientation evidence and imitate only the object’s apparent direction.
Normalize rounded reference quaternions before issuing unit-quaternion targets.
Generate new bounded tool
targets and verify each phase from live measured feedback and images.
Commanded poses are not measured
poses; missing fields are unknown, not zero.
Do not stream old absolute joint commands.
[Return to the live scene]
END HISTORICAL DEMONSTRATION. Use the current task and live observations below.
22


D.2 Context Formats
F1 is shared by all conditions. F2–F5 add the selected reference or interaction context; the no-demonstration
condition omits offline references. Image placeholders denote actual image blocks. The listings expose field
structure and content order; variable-length arrays and tool-dependent fields remain parameterized. Table 7
summarizes the role of each format.
Table 7
Overview of context and tool formats.
Format
Function
F1
Present the current task, camera images, measured robot state, and previous tool result.
F2
Supply chronological human or robot demonstration images and available annotations.
F3a
Pair a selected robot-video keyframe with measured TCP and gripper state.
F3b
Encode the intervening action samples, field order, and timing information.
F4
Specify the desired final arrangement through a goal image.
F5
Retain interaction history and incorporate live human cues or task updates.
F6a
Express structured motion, waypoint-sequence, and gripper requests.
F6b
Express geometric checks, image queries, and termination requests.
F7
Return execution feedback and fresh observations for the next decision.
F1
Shared live observation
[TASK T, OBSERVATION ot, FEEDBACK ft−1]
[Observation envelope]
{
"instruction": "<current task instruction>",
"images": [<metadata for each available camera>],
"state": {
"left": <measured left-arm state>,
"right": <measured right-arm state>
},
"extra": {
"env_step": <decision index>,
"interface": <active control interface>,
"interfaces": <per-arm interfaces, when available>
},
"previous_result": <preceding tool result, omitted at the first step>
}
<left wrist image block, when available>
<right wrist image block, when available>
<top image block, when available>
[State fields for each arm]
{
"joint_pos": <joint position vector, radians>,
"joint_vel": <joint velocity vector, radians/second>,
"joint_torque": <measured joint torque vector>,
"tcp_pose_xyzrpy": [<x>, <y>, <z>, <roll>, <pitch>, <yaw>],
"tcp_pose_xyzquat": [<x>, <y>, <z>, <qx>, <qy>, <qz>, <qw>],
"gripper": <measured opening, metres>,
"gripper_normalized": <measured opening, normalized>,
"gripper_command_normalized": <commanded opening, normalized>,
"gripper_vel": <measured opening velocity>,
"gripper_torque": <measured gripper torque>,
"gravity_compensation": <available compensation state>
}
The measured and commanded gripper values are separate.
Fresh state and images describe the current
scene; reference images and historical action samples do not replace them.
23


F2
Human and robot video references
[DEMONSTRATION V ]
[Human Video:
chronological visual input]
Historical human demonstration, t=<first selected time>s
<first selected image block>
Historical human demonstration, t=<next selected time>s
<next selected image block>
Historical human demonstration, t=<last selected time>s
<last selected image block>
End historical demonstration.
Use the live scene for the current task.
Intermediate selected frames follow the same time–image pattern.
Times are relative to the demonstration
video.
[Robot Video:
annotated keyframe excerpt]
HISTORICAL DEMONSTRATION.
<header describing the demonstration and its reference conventions>
{
"t_s": 7.531109,
"stage": "left body grasp",
"observation": "Left gripper surrounds the upright bottle body
while the right arm remains clear.",
"result": "Body support is established before the right arm approaches.",
"image_ids": {"top": "image_1"}
}
<top image block labeled image_1>
<subsequent selected records and their labeled image blocks>
END HISTORICAL DEMONSTRATION.
This excerpt uses the bottle demonstration’s recorded annotation.
Multi-view references additionally bind
left-wrist and right-wrist image identifiers at each selected time.
Video mode omits numerical state,
action, and alignment records.
24


F3a
Video + Action: measured keyframe state
[ALIGNED VISUAL AND STATE REFERENCE]
[Record at a selected video time]
Video + Action retains the keyframe annotations and image bindings in F2, and adds measured state and the
action interval leading to the next keyframe.
The following fields come from the initial bottle keyframe;
joint fields are omitted here to emphasize TCP and gripper alignment.
{
"t_s": 0.029,
"stage": "initial capped bottle",
"observation": "The capped bottle stands upright near the middle
of the table; both grippers are clear.",
"result": "Initial bottle and cap are together.",
"image_ids": {"top": "image_0"},
"state": {
"recording_t_s": 0,
"left_eef_x_m": 0.232841,
"left_eef_y_m": -0.019481,
"left_eef_z_m": 0.139562,
"left_eef_qx": 0.089674,
"left_eef_qy": 0.774834,
"left_eef_qz": -0.035674,
"left_eef_qw": 0.624754,
"left_gripper_measured": 0.998760,
"left_state_from_top_capture_s": 0.057664,
"right_eef_x_m": 0.237595,
"right_eef_y_m": 0.000425,
"right_eef_z_m": 0.138520,
"right_eef_qx": -0.057252,
"right_eef_qy": 0.778141,
"right_eef_qz": -0.024203,
"right_eef_qw": 0.625006,
"right_gripper_measured": 0.999130,
"right_state_from_top_capture_s": 0.052487
},
"action": <recorded interval shown in F3b>
}
<top image block labeled image_0>
Relative video time identifies the image; state-to-capture offsets retain the distinction between image
acquisition and arm feedback.
They do not imply perfectly simultaneous measurements.
F3b
Video + Action: interval encoding and sample rows
[RECORDED ACTIONS A]
[Column order supplied in the reference header]
"action_sample_encoding": {
"columns": [
["control_sample_index"], ["video_frame_index"],
["t_s"], ["recording_t_s"],
["left", "joint_target_rad"], ["left", "eef_target_xyz_xyzw"],
["left", "gripper_command"], ["left", "gripper_measured"],
["left", "command_from_top_capture_s"],
["left", "state_from_top_capture_s"],
["right", "joint_target_rad"], ["right", "eef_target_xyz_xyzw"],
["right", "gripper_command"], ["right", "gripper_measured"],
["right", "command_from_top_capture_s"],
["right", "state_from_top_capture_s"]
]
}
25


F3b
Video + Action: interval encoding and sample rows (continued)
[First two retained rows of the initial bottle interval]
"action": {
"kind": "recorded_bimanual_segment",
"next_keyframe": 2,
"sample_period_s": 1,
"sample_rows": [
[0, 0, 0.029, 0,
[0.103, -0.003, 0.011, -0.529, 0.284, 0.124],
[0.212, -0.024, 0.057, 0.080, 0.854, -0.065, 0.509],
1, 0.999, 0.050335, 0.057664,
[-0.143, 0.014, 0.017, -0.500, -0.183, -0.141],
[0.218, 0.005, 0.060, -0.046, 0.856, 0.006, 0.515],
1, 0.999, 0.044953, 0.052487],
[30, 28, 1.029638, 1.001992,
"=", "=", "=", "=", 0.046323, 0.053257,
[-0.143, 0.012, 0.017, -0.499, -0.183, -0.143],
[0.218, 0.005, 0.061, -0.047, 0.855, 0.005, 0.517],
"=", "=", 0.046360, 0.057344]
]
}
[How to read the records]
Each row follows the header’s column order.
In joint, pose, and gripper columns, "=" repeats the
preceding row’s value within the same interval; the first row is explicit.
Null means missing, never
zero.
Joint and pose arrays retain their original order.
The target pose uses metres and quaternion
xyzw.
Keyframe geometry is measured feedback; action geometry represents recorded commands and is not proof of
arrival.
The full interval retains its endpoints, periodic samples, and gripper changes, rather than
reconstructing unsampled motion or contact forces.
See Appendix C for alignment and sampling.
F4
Target-image context
[GOAL IMAGE G]
[Input order]
instruction:
Observe the target image and arrange the blocks on the table
into the T shape shown in the image. Match the target image
as closely as possible in color, relative position, and spacing.
<target image block depicting the desired arrangement>
<live observation envelope F1>
<current wrist and overhead image blocks>
The target image specifies the desired outcome, not a trajectory.
It remains distinct from the live
images used to assess the current arrangement.
The instruction for fruit arrangement changes the matching
attributes to fruit identity, relative position, and spacing.
26


F5
Self-history and online interaction
[HISTORY Ht]
[Self-history:
retained interaction sequence]
<task instruction>
<past observation and its camera image blocks>
<selected tool and its arguments>
<tool outcome, measured feedback, and next observation>
<later retained observation--request--feedback turns>
<current live observation F1>
This is a conversation-order schematic, not an additional JSON object.
Past views and action outcomes
provide context when exploration changes visibility.
[Online human interaction:
updated task evidence]
<ongoing interaction task>
<retained human moves or gestures and robot responses>
<current board / human move history, when supplied>
<live images showing the current gesture or board state>
<current measured robot state and preceding tool result>
Gesture evidence is observed in live images; task updates may also be supplied as operator messages.
For
turn-taking tasks, the prompt specifies whose turn permits action and when the human hand must have left
the workspace.
These cues are not prerecorded demonstrations.
D.3 Tool Requests and Feedback
P3 guides tool selection, while P4 governs recovery and termination. F6 illustrates tool requests, and F7
shows the feedback returned for the next decision.
P3
Motion, grasping, and release instructions
[MODEL TOOL-SELECTION POLICY]
[Efficient motion and observation boundaries]
Prefer move_eef_chunk for clear, contact-free paths that need no intermediate observation.
Do not split
these paths into many decisions or repeatedly check already-established reachability.
Stop to observe at
contact, gripper changes, occlusion, or tracking anomalies.
Efficiency never justifies skipping
verification.
For position-only adjustments, keep the last acknowledged target quaternion in the complete pose_xyzquat.
Never replace a held orientation with load-induced measured drift; investigate the drift first.
A null
arm retains its submitted targets rather than moving to a new viewing position.
[Approach and grasp]
Approach and align, inspect fresh images and state, then call set_gripper separately.
Before closure,
consider wrist close-ups, the top overview, measured TCP target error, and joint velocity together.
A
submitted target does not prove arrival.
Target-versus-measured errors are reported after each action.
Settled means joint stability, not precise TCP arrival or task success.
Check fingertips, wrists, camera housings, forearms, and table clearance in fresh views.
Do not advance
contact without verified stabilization and clearance.
Keep the acknowledged gripper command during
transport; issue a separate gripper request when a grasp change is needed.
[Release and disengagement]
Before releasing or regrasping, verify that the intended surface or another hand reliably supports the
entire object.
Observe after release and before withdrawing.
A fully-open command does not prove that a
wide object detached.
If the object stays fixed relative to the fingers or the destination still appears empty, keep it reliably
supported by the intended surface or container while disengaging the fingers.
Do not lift a still-trapped
object away and report completion.
[Read execution evidence]
The planned TCP points describe the planned path, including its start, not a measured trajectory.
Judge
execution from execution feedback and fresh state.
Joint torque includes gravity effects and is not a
direct contact-force measurement.
Do not equate a commanded pose, gripper closure, or accepted plan with
the intended physical result.
27


F6a
Motion and gripper requests
[OUTPUT at = (ut, vt)]
[Move to one absolute TCP target]
{
"name": "move_to",
"arguments": {
"target": {
"left": null,
"right": {"pose_xyzquat": [<x>, <y>, <z>, <qx>, <qy>, <qz>, <qw>]}
},
"note": "<current evidence and purpose of this motion>"
}
}
The host samples the direct straight-line/SLERP path, applies calibrated frame conversion and IK, and
adjusts timing.
Gripper targets remain unchanged.
[Move through an ordered sequence]
{
"name": "move_eef_chunk",
"arguments": {
"poses": [
{"left": null, "right": {"pose_xyzquat": <first complete pose>}},
{"left": null, "right": {"pose_xyzquat": <second complete pose>}}
],
"note": "<evidence that this segment needs no intermediate observation>"
}
}
Each pose is absolute and complete.
The host preserves every waypoint and its order, adding samples along
the same path and changing timing rather than rewriting the geometry.
[Change the gripper in a separate decision]
{
"name": "set_gripper",
"arguments": {
"positions": {"left": null, "right": <normalized opening>},
"note": "<fresh evidence for grasping or releasing>"
}
}
Opening is 0 fully closed and 1 fully open.
Results distinguish requested, submitted, and measured
values.
After detected obstruction, the gripper reference is brought near measured position to avoid
accumulating large error.
Arms retain their last submitted targets; an unselected side holds.
F6b
Geometric checks and terminal requests
[ALTERNATIVE TOOL SELECTIONS]
[Check a path without executing it]
{
"name": "check_path",
"arguments": {
"poses": [
{"left": <complete pose or null>, "right": <complete pose or null>}
],
"note": "<uncertain approach or permitted orientation to test>"
}
}
Check full-path IK, joint limits, and timing without sending arm or gripper commands.
Acceptance does not
certify collision clearance or physical tracking; execution replans from fresh feedback.
28


F6b
Geometric checks and terminal requests (continued)
[Query image geometry]
{
"name": "locate_point",
"arguments": {
"camera": "<left, right, or top>",
"pixel_xy": [<image x>, <image y>],
"reference_step": <earlier observation index>,
"reference_pixel_xy": [<same feature's earlier x>, <earlier y>],
"note": "<feature identity and reason for geometric query>"
}
}
Pixel origin is the image’s top-left corner.
The reference fields are optional; a single view supplies a
camera ray, not depth.
Two wrist views require the same stationary feature and sufficient parallax.
Use
a metric estimate only when metric_position_available=true.
A triangulation candidate from degenerate
geometry is diagnostic, not a valid motion target.
[Finish or report no safe continuation]
{"name": "done",
"arguments": {
"summary": "<direct evidence of the physical goal and any uncertainty>",
"hindsight": "<lessons from the attempt>"
}}
{"name": "give_up",
"arguments": {
"reason": "<attempted strategies and evidence ruling out safe progress>",
"hindsight": "<lessons from the attempt>"
}}
These are alternative responses, not multiple selections in one turn.
Completion requires current
physical evidence; the tool itself does not assign the evaluation success label.
F7
Feedback returned after a request
[NEW INPUT TO THE POLICY]
[Selected feedback fields and their roles]
previous_result
<tool result or concrete rejection reason>
result / execution_feedback (when returned)
<requested-versus-measured endpoint errors>
<per-arm execution and settling diagnostics>
state
left / right
joint_pos, joint_vel
tcp_pose_xyzrpy, tcp_pose_xyzquat
gripper_normalized, gripper_command_normalized
<fresh wrist and overhead image blocks>
This is a field-role schematic:
result wrapping and diagnostics depend on the tool.
An accepted motion
plan describes a request; fresh state and execution feedback establish whether it was tracked.
Images
establish whether the object interaction occurred.
[Decision context]
Read a rejection before choosing another target.
After execution, compare requested and measured pose,
gripper command and measured opening, and visible object motion.
Settling diagnostics concern joint
stability; they do not by themselves establish accurate TCP arrival, secure grasping, or task completion.
29


P4
Recovery and termination instructions
[NEXT-DECISION POLICY]
[Recover while preserving the task]
One failed action, tool rejection, missed grasp, occluded target, or uncertain result does not establish
impossibility.
Diagnose from fresh images, measured state, and previous_result.
Try safe alternatives in
viewpoint, approach, grasp, orientation, path, or step size and verify each result.
After IK rejection, preserve required tool-axis directions and compare approach positions, heights, and
permitted axial rotations.
Use check_path for uncertain alternatives; do not tilt the gripper merely to
make IK pass.
The configured workspace is not a measured reachability boundary:
an in-range point may
still be unreachable at the required orientation.
IK acceptance does not certify clearance between camera
housings, arms, or objects.
[Verify the physical goal]
Call done only when fresh observations establish the requested physical outcome.
In the summary, give
direct evidence distinguishing completion from an unfinished state, plus any remaining uncertainty.
A
human assigns the final success/failure label; done itself is not that label.
For insertion, confirm actual mating and seating, not merely resting on the socket.
Do not declare
completion after withdrawing due to load while the result remains unconfirmed.
Continue safe verification
or recovery while the outcome is uncertain; do not stop early merely to hand the decision to a human.
[When no safe continuation remains]
Do not call give_up while reasonable safe strategies remain.
Consider meaningfully different recoveries.
Use give_up only when evidence shows that the task cannot be completed or further attempts would violate
safety constraints.
State the attempted strategies and the evidence preventing further progress.
D.4 Representative Task Prompts
The examples below retain the task-level wording, with asset references replaced by semantic placeholders.
They are supplied together with the applicable shared instructions, context, and tool definitions above, rather
than used as standalone one-sentence controller prompts. Prepared task specifications and recorded variants
are distinguished where relevant.
Cases 1--2
Human demonstration tasks
[HUMAN VIDEO / F2]
[Pick Red Towel:
demonstration-conditioned task]
Watch the historical human demonstration frames and imitate the demonstrated grasping method to pick up
the red towel with the robot’s right hand in the current scene.
[Pick Red Towel:
prepared goal-only comparison]
Pick up the red towel with the robot’s right hand.
[Pick Red Towel:
recorded procedural variant without video]
Block the towel with one hand, slide the other hand underneath it, and then grip the towel to lift it.
[Pick Up Notebook:
recorded task]
Watch the reference video at <notebook demonstration> and pick up the notebook.
[Associated context]
The video-conditioned tasks include chronological demonstration image blocks as in F2.
The no-video
variants omit those blocks.
The procedural towel variant provides a grasping method in text; it is not
the same instruction as the prepared goal-only comparison.
30


Case 3
Unscrew Bottle Cap
[ROBOT VIDEO OR VIDEO + ACTION / F2–F3]
[Recorded goal without demonstration]
In the current scene, unscrew and remove the cap from the bottle on the table, and leave the bottle
standing securely on the table.
[Recorded demonstration-conditioned instruction]
Use the top-view robot demonstration keyframes and corresponding robot states, end-effector poses, and
action trajectories in <bottle demonstration> as a reference, adapting the actions to the current
observations.
In the current scene, unscrew and remove the cap from the bottle on the table, and leave
the bottle standing securely on the table.
[Mode-specific reference interpretation]
The recorded task wording mentions numerical references in both conditions.
In Video, P2 explicitly
restricts the supplied reference to images and annotations.
In Video + Action, F3 additionally supplies
keyframe states and action samples.
Numerical references are therefore available only in Video + Action,
not inferred from the task wording.
[Shared instruction applied to this reference]
Preserve the demonstrated contact side, object-to-gripper orientation, push/pull direction, arm roles, and
stage order.
Identify the relevant stage in each motion note and explain necessary deviations using live
evidence.
A demonstration’s outcome describes that historical episode only; verify the requested physical
result in the current observations.
Case 4
Remove and Reinsert Plug
[ROBOT VIDEO OR VIDEO + ACTION / F2–F3]
[Recorded Video instruction]
Use the chronological three-view robot demonstration keyframes in <plug video demonstration> as a
reference.
In the current scene, remove the plug from the power strip on the table, then insert the plug
back into the same socket, and leave it fully seated after releasing the gripper.
[Recorded Video + Action instruction]
Use the three-view robot demonstration keyframes and corresponding robot states, end-effector poses, and
action trajectories in <plug action demonstration> as a reference, adapting the actions to the current
observations.
In the current scene, remove the plug from the power strip on the table, then insert the
plug back into the same socket, and leave it fully seated after releasing the gripper.
[Additional control guidance:
arm choice and clearance]
Choose the arm or arms using fresh views while preserving the demonstrated roles.
Use one arm when
sufficient, or both when support is needed and clearance allows it.
Explain the arm choice in the first
motion note.
Keep an unused side null so that it retains its acknowledged target.
Check camera, wrist,
table, and inter-arm clearance; IK feasibility alone does not establish clearance.
[Additional control guidance:
orientation and completion]
For a position-only adjustment, hold the acknowledged target quaternion rather than replacing it with
measured drift under load.
Preserve the required tool direction when comparing approach heights or
permitted axial rotations after rejection.
When the task requires a table-perpendicular gripper, align
tool +z with the table’s downward normal; allow axial rotation only when jaw and contact alignment permit
it.
Without table calibration, base -z is only a proxy.
Verify alignment from the measured TCP pose
before advancing contact.
Call set_gripper separately after observing the approach.
Before release, verify reliable support;
observe finger disengagement before withdrawal.
Do not equate a requested pose or gripper state with the
physical result.
Confirm actual insertion and seating after release, rather than a plug merely resting on
the socket.
31


Cases 5--6
Goal-image arrangement tasks
[TARGET IMAGE / F4]
[Arrange T Shape]
Observe the target image and arrange the blocks on the table into the T shape shown in the image.
Match
the target image as closely as possible in color, relative position, and spacing.
[Arrange Fruit]
Observe the reference image and arrange the four fruits on the table to match the layout shown in the
image.
Match the target as closely as possible in fruit identity, relative position, and spacing.
[Associated input and shared verification]
Each task is paired with its target image and fresh live observations.
Shared release instructions
require support before opening the gripper and observation before withdrawal.
Shared termination
instructions require direct evidence of the requested arrangement, rather than merely completing a
sequence of placements.
Cases 7--8
Exploration with self-history
[SELF-HISTORY / F5]
[Lemon to Pink Plate:
prepared task]
Explore the current scene, locate the pink plate, and place the lemon from the table onto the plate.
[Movable Exploration:
task specification]
Use the movable exploration history as context.
Continue searching for the Sprite bottle on the table by
changing the observation position or safely moving obstacles, then grasping it and placing it into the
yellow basket containing the strawberry toy once the target is found.
[Associated input]
Retained observations, tool requests, and outcomes precede the current observation.
This context records
what earlier viewpoints revealed and what previous interactions changed.
The live state remains the basis
for selecting the next tool target.
[Shared recovery instruction]
An occluded target or uncertain result does not establish impossibility.
Diagnose from fresh images,
measured state, and previous tool feedback, then try safe alternatives in viewpoint, approach, grasp,
orientation, path, or step size and verify each result.
Cases 9--10
Online human interaction
[LIVE HUMAN CUES AND INTERACTION HISTORY / F5]
[Pointed Fruit Pickup:
recorded instruction]
Repeatedly pick up whichever fruit the human points to and place it onto the plate.
If no gesture has
been made yet, wait for the human’s gesture.
Stop only when the human makes an OK hand gesture;
otherwise, keep waiting for the human’s gesture.
[Tic-Tac-Toe:
recorded role and turn-taking instruction]
Play a legal game of tic-tac-toe as Green, moving first against an on-site human who plays Blue.
Continuously use [Current Board and Human Move History] as context, update the board after every turn, and
move only when it is Green’s turn and the human’s hand has left the board.
[Tic-Tac-Toe:
move priorities]
Prioritize an immediate win, then block an immediate opponent win, then choose a move that creates a
double threat or at least preserves a draw.
[Associated input]
These tasks use the live gesture or board, retained interaction history, and fresh robot observations.
The fruit instruction defines a continuing interaction with an explicit stop gesture.
The game
instruction separates legal turn-taking from move selection; a favorable board position does not override
the requirement to wait for the human hand to leave.
32
