Title: TRACS: A Geometry-Aware Framework for Scalable Multi-Agent Path Finding in Warehouses

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.23137v1

Published Time: Tue, 22 Sep 2026 01:19:59 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
> 1

# TRACS: A Geometry-Aware Framework for Scalable Multi-Agent Path Finding in Warehouses 

Siddhant Erande and Anuj Tiwari 

Abstract —Large-scale warehouse automation relies on efficient multi-agent path finding (MAPF) to coordinate thousands of robots in structured environments. Existing MAPF algorithms primarily improve conflict resolution while representing ware-houses as generic navigation graphs, overlooking their inherent geometric structure and traffic patterns. This paper presents TRACS (Traffic-aware Routing and Aisle Coordination System), a geometry-aware planning framework that exploits warehouse layout to simplify planning rather than introducing another conflict-resolution algorithm. TRACS constructs a directed rout-ing graph with alternating one-way aisles that eliminates head-on and edge-swap conflicts by design, decoupling spatial rout-ing from temporal traffic coordination. Independent hybrid graph–grid routing is combined with lightweight edge-based scheduling to avoid joint space–time search while ensuring collision-free execution. Experimental evaluation on warehouse benchmarks against representative priority-based, iterative re-pair, and search-based MAPF planners shows that TRACS con-sistently achieves a 100% empirical success rate while substan-tially improving planning scalability. On fixed-scene benchmarks with up to 1000 robots, TRACS reduces planning time by up to 14.7× while maintaining competitive makespan, lower flowtime, and near-optimal path quality. Under a fixed 10-minute planning budget, TRACS routes up to 5120 robots—roughly twice the largest fleet reached by the strongest baselines—while sustaining a 100% success rate, demonstrating the effectiveness of exploiting warehouse geometry for scalable robotic warehouse systems. 

Index Terms —Path Planning for Multiple Mobile Robots or Agents, Inventory Management, Constrained Motion Planning, Intelligent Transportation Systems, Planning, Scheduling and Coordination. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Autonomous Robotic Mobile Fulfillment Systems (RMFS) have become the backbone of modern warehouse automation, enabling hundreds to thousands of mobile robots to transport inventory between storage locations and workstations [2]. As warehouse scale continues to increase, coordinating these robot fleets safely and efficiently has become a major chal-lenge, making collision-free multi-robot path planning one of the principal computational bottlenecks in warehouse automa-tion. Multi-Agent Path Finding (MAPF) provides the standard framework for planning collision-free paths for multiple robots operating in a shared environment [1]. Over the past decade, 

This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be accessible. S. Erande is with the Department of Engineering Design, and, A. Tiwari is with Department of Mechanical Engineering at In-dian Institute of Technology Madras, Chennai 600036, India. E-mails: 

siddhant.rs.1093@gmail.com , anujt@iitm.ac.in 

considerable research has focused on improving MAPF scal-ability through increasingly sophisticated conflict-resolution strategies. Representative approaches include optimal search-based solvers such as conflict-based search (CBS) [3], increas-ing cost tree search (ICTS) [16], M* [15], and SAT-based methods [17]; bounded-suboptimal and symmetry-breaking variants [4], [11]; prioritized and coupled planning meth-ods [5], [8], [9]; learning-based coordination [14]; iterative repair methods such as MAPF-LNS2 [6]; and scalable local-search planners including PIBT2 [18] and LaCAM [7]. Despite their methodological differences, these approaches share a common assumption, that is, the environment is represented as a generic navigation graph, while robot interactions are resolved dynamically in the joint space–time domain. Con-sequently, as robot density increases, an increasingly large fraction of computation is devoted to conflict resolution rather than geometric route planning. Warehouse environments, however, exhibit considerably more structure than generic navigation domains. They con-sist of long parallel storage aisles connected through regular intersections, naturally producing predictable traffic patterns. Many industrial warehouse systems already employ directional traffic policies to reduce congestion and improve operational efficiency. Existing works have leveraged these characteristics through highway-guided search [10], lifelong warehouse plan-ning [12], [13], and traffic-aware coordination. Nevertheless, these methods continue to operate on the original navigation graph and rely on online conflict resolution within the con-ventional MAPF framework. In this work, rather than developing increasingly sophis-ticated mechanisms for resolving conflicts during planning, it is argued that warehouse structure should be incorporated directly into the planning representation. By embedding geo-metric properties of warehouse layouts into the routing graph, many conflicts can be eliminated before planning even begins, shifting part of the coordination burden from the planner to the environment itself. To realize this idea, this article proposes 

TRACS (Traffic-aware Routing and Aisle Coordination System) , a geometry-aware planning framework designed for structured warehouse environments. TRACS constructs a di-rected routing graph by assigning alternating travel directions to warehouse aisles, thereby eliminating head-on and edge-swap conflicts by construction while preserving global reach-ability. Route generation is decoupled from traffic coordination through a hybrid graph–grid planner that computes indepen-dent geometric routes, followed by a lightweight edge-based scheduler that resolves only the remaining local interactions. By preventing a large class of conflicts through representation arXiv:2609.23137v1 [eess.SY] 19 Sep 2026 2      

> Fig. 1. Overview of the TRACS pipeline. (I) Graph construction : the warehouse layout is converted into a directed routing graph by assigning alternating one-way travel directions to parallel aisles. (II) Route planning : each robot independently computes its lowest-cost route on this graph, combining local grid search with directed-graph search over its knearest entry/exit edges. (III) Traffic coordination : at execution time, a lightweight edge-based scheduler grants edge, cell, and junction reservations under capacity and headway constraints. Because stages II and III are decoupled, TRACS avoids joint space–time search while still guaranteeing collision-free execution.

rather than search, TRACS avoids expensive joint space–time exploration while ensuring collision-free execution. TRACS is intended for warehouse infrastructures where directional traffic policies can be naturally embedded into the routing graph. Within this setting, exploiting warehouse geometry simplifies planning while maintaining practical solution quality. TRACS is evaluated through three complementary bench-mark studies, described in Section III, by quantifying, i) plan-ning performance against representative search-based, priority-based and iterative-repair MAPF planners on fixed warehouse maps, ii) scalability under a fixed planning-time budget, and, iii) path quality relative to CBS. The primary contributions of this work are summarized as follows:  

> •

To embed the structural regularity of warehouse layouts into the planning representation through a geometry-aware directed routing graph that eliminates head-on and edge-swap conflicts by construction.  

> •

To propose TRACS , a decoupled framework in which a hybrid graph–grid pipeline combining local grid planning with directed aisle navigation generates spatial routes, and a lightweight edge-based scheduler handles temporal coordination, in place of a further conflict-resolution algorithm.  

> •

To experimentally demonstrate that exploiting ware-house geometry substantially improves planning scala-bility while maintaining competitive path quality across large-scale warehouse benchmarks. II. P ROPOSED FRAMEWORK 

TRACS embeds the regular aisle structure of warehouses directly into the routing representation, so that major classes of conflicts are eliminated before planning begins and spatial routing can be decoupled from temporal coordination. As illustrated in Fig. 1, the proposed framework consists of three stages: (I) the warehouse layout is converted into a geometry-aware directed routing graph that captures the ware-house topology together with directional traffic constraints; (II) each robot independently computes a spatial route using a hybrid graph–grid planner; and (III) an edge-based traffic scheduler coordinates execution through lightweight resource reservations and movement policies. 

A. Geometry-Aware Warehouse Representation 

Warehouse layouts exhibit a highly regular topology, con-sisting of parallel storage aisles connected by perpendicular cross aisles. TRACS exploits this regularity by constructing a directed routing graph that carries traffic policies in the planning representation itself. The warehouse is first modelled as a binary occupancy grid 

W = ( C, O ), where C denotes the set of traversable cells and 

O represents static obstacles and storage locations. From this grid, a directed routing graph G = ( V, E, w ) is constructed, where V represents aisle intersections, E denotes directed aisle segments, and w : E → R+ assigns each edge a traversal cost. Unlike the occupancy grid, which contains every traversable cell, the routing graph retains only the topological decision points required for global navigation. This abstraction signifi-cantly reduces the search space while preserving connectivity between all reachable regions of the warehouse. 

1) Directed Aisle Assignment: Let R = {r1, r 2, . . . , r m}

and C = {c1, c 2, . . . , c n} denote the sets of horizontal and vertical aisles, respectively. Horizontal aisles are assigned alternating travel directions according to, 

d(ri) = 

(

→, i even ,

←, i odd , (1) 3   

> Fig. 2. Construction of the directed routing graph. Alternating aisle direc-tions preserve global connectivity while eliminating head-on and edge-swap conflicts by construction. As a result, the remaining interactions are localized to junction nodes, which constitute only 1–2% of the navigable cells in a typical warehouse.

while vertical aisles follow 

d(cj ) = 

(

↑, j even ,

↓, j odd . (2) Each directed edge is assigned a traversal cost proportional to its geometric length, 

w(e) = ℓ(e), (3) where ℓ(e) denotes the number of traversable cells belonging to edge e.This alternating assignment preserves global reachability while preventing bidirectional travel within individual aisles. As a result, traffic is naturally distributed across neighboring corridors without requiring manually designed routing policies or additional traffic optimization. 

2) Conflict Elimination by Representation: A key feature of TRACS is that many conflicts are removed through the graph construction itself rather than being resolved during planning. Head-on and edge-swap conflicts cannot occur along any directed aisle segment. Each aisle segment is represented by a directed edge with a fixed traversal direction. Robots are therefore constrained to move only in the direction assigned to that edge. Since opposite-direction traversal is prohibited, two robots cannot simultaneously enter the same aisle segment from opposite ends. Consequently, both head-on and edge-swap conflicts are eliminated by construction. The only re-maining interactions occur when multiple robots converge at shared junctions. By eliminating these dominant classes of conflicts be-forehand, the planning problem is fundamentally simplified. Instead of coordinating robot interactions throughout the entire warehouse, online coordination is restricted to the compar-atively small number of junctions connecting directed aisle segments. Fig. 2 illustrates the construction of the directed routing graph for a representative warehouse layout. However, this simplification restricts the solution space. Because the alternating directed graph only contains a sub-set of the movements available on the occupancy grid, the construction preserves reachability but not optimality: routes that would traverse an aisle in an optimal solution are replaced by detours due to alternating directed edges. But we also show that in the (Fig. 5) that beyond a certain heuristic separation between start and goal, the sub-optimality induced due to construction becomes lesser significant as opposed to start and goal points nearby. The construction also assumes parallel aisle groups; isolated corridors, dead-end aisles and single workstation access lanes cannot be made one-way without disconnecting the map, and are therefore retained as bidirec-tional edges that the scheduler treats as mutually exclusive resources. Since directions are fixed only at graph-construction time, demand-aware assignments can be introduced without altering the routing or scheduling stages. 

B. Hybrid Spatial Routing 

Once the directed routing graph has been constructed, each robot plans its route independently without considering the states of other robots. Consequently, route generation depends solely on the static warehouse geometry, while collision avoid-ance is handled later by the traffic coordination stage. For a robot ri = ( si, g i) with start location si and goal loca-tion gi, the complete route Pi is represented as a composition of three sub routes, 

Pi = P entry i ⊕ P graph i ⊕ P exit i , (4) where P entry i sub route connects the start location si to the routing graph (Fig. 2 (a)) so the robot enters the directed routing, P graph i is the sub route on the directed graph route to reach near the goal location gi, and P exit i connects the robot from the routing graph to the goal location gi. The optimal route is selected by minimizing the total travel distance, 

P ∗ 

> i

= arg min      

> Pentry
> i, P graph
> i, P exit
> i



L(P entry  

> i

) + L(P graph  

> i

) + L(P exit  

> i

)



.

(5) where L(·) denotes the corresponding path length. 

1) Local Grid Routing: Robot start and goal locations generally do not coincide with vertices of the routing graph. Therefore, local access paths are computed on the occupancy grid using A* search with the Manhattan-distance heuristic. Rather than restricting the search to the nearest aisle, the planner evaluates the k nearest candidate entry and exit edges within a bounded search radius. This provides additional flexibility when one-way aisle constraints would otherwise introduce unnecessary detours. 

2) Global Graph Routing: For every feasible entry–exit pair, the shortest path is computed on the directed routing graph using A* search. Edge costs are proportional to aisle lengths, while the heuristic is given by the Manhattan distance between graph vertices. To avoid repeated graph searches, computed routes are cached using the ordered entry–exit edge pair as the lookup key, allowing subsequent routing queries to be answered directly from memory. 

3) Candidate Route Selection: Each candidate route is formed by concatenating the local entry path, the directed graph route, and the local exit path. The planner evalu-ates all feasible combinations and selects the entry–exit pair 

(e∗

> in

, e ∗

> out

) that minimizes the total route cost, 

L(P entry i ) + L(P graph i ) + L(P exit i ). (6) 4

Algorithm 1: Hybrid Spatial Routing 

Input: Warehouse grid, directed routing graph, start 

si, goal gi

Output: Spatial route Pi

Determine the k nearest candidate entry and exit edges; 

J∗ ← ∞ ;

foreach candidate entry edge do 

Compute local A* path to the entry edge; 

foreach candidate exit edge do 

Retrieve or compute the graph route; Compute local A* path from the exit edge to the goal; Evaluate the total route cost; Update the best route if the cost decreases; Return the minimum-cost composite route; Considering multiple nearby entry and exit edges signifi-cantly reduces the path overhead introduced by one-way aisle constraints while keeping the search space compact. 

C. Edge-Based Traffic Coordination 

The hybrid routing stage generates collision-unaware routes independently for every robot. Safe execution is ensured through an edge-based traffic coordination mechanism that regulates robot movement using lightweight local resource reservations. Since the directed routing graph eliminates head-on and edge-swap conflicts by construction, online coordi-nation is required only for robots sharing aisle capacity or competing for the same junctions. Each directed aisle segment is assigned a traversal capacity, 

C(e) = max (1 , ⌊ρ ℓ (e)⌋) , (7) where ρ ∈ (0 , 1] is a user-defined occupancy ratio and 

ℓ(e) denotes the geometric length of edge e. Consequently, longer aisle segments can safely accommodate multiple robots simultaneously while maintaining sufficient separation. To coordinate robot movement, TRACS maintains four lightweight reservation structures, 

R = {L, R c, R v , H },

where L(e, t ) records the occupancy of edge e at time t,

Rc(c, t ) stores cell reservations, Rv (v, t ) maintains junction reservations, and H(e) records the latest entry time onto each edge. Robots requesting access to the same edge are organized into edge-specific queues and admitted according to the avail-able edge capacity while satisfying the movement policy. A robot is allowed to advance only if 

L(e, t ) < C (e), Rc(c, t + 1) = 0 ,Rv (v, t + 1) = 0 , t − H(e) ≥ ∆. (8) where the four conditions correspond respectively to available edge capacity, an unoccupied destination cell, an available destination junction when leaving an aisle, and a minimum 

Algorithm 2: Edge-Based Traffic Coordination 

Input: Planned graph routes 

Output: Collision-free execution Initialise reservation tables and edge queues; 

while unfinished robots remain do 

Insert robots requesting their next edge into the corresponding queues; 

foreach edge with waiting robots do while edge capacity is available do 

Select the next robot from the queue; 

if movement policy is satisfied then 

Reserve edge, cell, and junction resources; Update headway information and robot state; 

else 

Robot waits until the next scheduling cycle; Advance the simulation time; temporal headway ∆ between consecutive robots entering the same edge. Once a robot is admitted, the edge occupancy, cell reserva-tion, junction reservation, and headway timestamp are updated before the next scheduling decision. Since every scheduling decision depends only on local edge occupancy and neighbor-ing resources, TRACS coordinates traffic without replanning complete trajectories or maintaining a global space–time reser-vation table. 

D. Computational Complexity 

The computational cost of TRACS consists of three compo-nents, graph construction, per-robot spatial routing, and online traffic coordination. 

1. Graph construction: The directed routing graph is con-structed once during preprocessing by traversing the occu-pancy grid, requiring O(HW ) time for a warehouse of di-mensions H × W . This preprocessing cost is independent of the number of robots. 

2. Per-robot spatial routing cost: During route generation, each of the N robots evaluates at most k candidate entry and k candidate exit edges, resulting in at most k2 candidate routes. Each candidate requires two local A* searches on the occupancy grid and one A* search on the routing graph, giving a total routing complexity of 

O N k 2 (HW log( HW ) + |E| log |V |) , (9) where |V | and |E| denote the numbers of graph vertices and directed edges, respectively. In practice, caching graph routes using ordered entry–exit edge pairs substantially reduces re-peated graph searches. 

3. Online coordination: During execution, each robot is pro-cessed at most once per scheduling cycle. Since reservation 5

updates, queue operations, occupancy checks, and movement-policy evaluations all require constant time, the scheduling complexity over a planning horizon of T time steps is 

O(N T ). (10) Combining all three stages yields an overall computational complexity of 

O HW + N k 2 (HW log( HW ) + |E| log |V |) + N T  .

(11) Because routing is performed independently for each robot and online coordination is limited to lightweight local resource management, the dominant computational cost arises from route generation rather than conflict resolution. This enables TRACS to scale efficiently to large robot fleets operating in structured warehouse environments. III. E XPERIMENTAL EVALUATION 

A. Experimental Setup 

We evaluate TRACS on representative warehouse environ-ments and compare its performance against several state-of-the-art MAPF planners, including Prioritized Planning, PIBT2, LaCAM, and MAPF-LNS2. All methods are executed on iden-tical warehouse layouts and robot configurations to ensure a fair and consistent comparison. All experiments are conducted on a machine equipped with an Intel Core i9-14900 CPU and 64 GB of RAM, running Ubuntu 22.04 LTS. The evaluation follows two complementary experimental protocols. The first is a fixed-scene study performed on a common warehouse layout (constructed as shown in Fig. 2), where the number of simultaneously active robots is varied from 100 to 1000. This experiment measures planning time and solution quality as the fleet size increases. The second protocol is an incremental-budget stress test conducted on two larger warehouse layouts with different dimensions and aisle spacings ( 207 × 457 and 307 × 927 ). Starting with 10 robots, the fleet size is doubled after each successful run. The process continues until a planner is unable to compute a solution within a 10-minute time limit, at which point the largest fleet successfully planned within the allotted budget is recorded. Our evaluation considers four complementary performance metrics, 

i) success rate , which is the percentage of robots that success-fully reach their assigned goals, 

ii) planning time , which is the time required to compute feasible routes, excluding graph preprocessing. 

iii) path quality , which is the ratio between the executed path length and the corresponding shortest-path length, and, 

iv) traffic efficiency , which is measured through average edge occupancy and the spatial distribution of traffic throughout the warehouse. All competing planners are evaluated on the same bench-mark instances using identical start-goal assignments, and TRACS uses the same directed routing graph and a fixed edge occupancy ratio ρ across all experiments.                                   

> TABLE I PLANNER COMPARISON AT N= 1000 ON THE 81 ×125 WAREHOUSE .AMONG PLANNERS ACHIEVING A 100% SUCCESS RATE (SR), TRACS
> PROVIDES THE FASTEST PLANNING TIME AND THE LOWEST FLOWTIME .TIMES ARE REPORTED IN SECONDS .Planner SR Time (s) Makespan Flowtime PIBT2 [18] 67% 93.5 240 240,000 Prioritized [8] 100% 629.8 177 98,270 MAPF-LNS2 [6] 100% 439.3 177 98,270 LaCAM [7] 100% 77.5 178 178,000
> TRACS (ours) 100% 42.7 182 73,635

B. Scalability Analysis 

The primary objective of TRACS is to improve planning scalability by exploiting the inherent structure of warehouse environments rather than relying on increasingly sophisticated conflict-resolution algorithms. Fig. 3 compares the planning performance of TRACS against representative MAPF planners as the number of robots increases on the fixed-scene bench-mark. Across all fleet sizes, TRACS achieves a 100% empirical success rate while consistently requiring less planning time than the competing methods. Since robots compute their routes independently and bidirectional aisle conflicts are eliminated during graph construction, online coordination is limited to lo-cal contention at shared resources instead of global space–time conflict resolution. Consequently, the planning cost increases much more gradually as the fleet grows, and the performance gap becomes increasingly pronounced at high robot densities where conflict resolution dominates the computation of con-ventional MAPF planners. Despite the directional routing constraints, TRACS main-tains a makespan that remains competitive with existing ap-proaches (Fig. 3, right). At N = 1000 on the 81 × 125 

warehouse (Table I), TRACS achieves the fastest planning time among all planners with a 100% success rate, requiring only 

42 .7 s. This corresponds to speedups of 14 .7× over Prioritized Planning and 10 .3× over MAPF-LNS2. In addition, TRACS produces the lowest overall flowtime, indicating that improved scalability is achieved without sacrificing solution quality. 

1) Maximum Fleet Size Under a Fixed Planning Budget: 

While the previous experiment evaluates scalability under increasing robot populations, a complementary question is how large a fleet each planner can successfully route within a practical planning budget. To answer this, we evaluate all methods on two larger warehouse layouts using a fixed time limit of 10 minutes. As summarized in Table II and Fig. 3, TRACS success-fully plans routes for up to 5120 robots on the 207 × 457 

warehouse and 2560 robots on the larger 307 × 927 layout. These limits are approximately twice those achieved by the strongest baseline planners (PIBT2 and LaCAM) and nearly an order of magnitude larger than those supported by Prioritized Planning and MAPF-LNS2. EECBS, the bounded-suboptimal search baseline, exhausts the time budget far earlier (at 40 –80 

robots), highlighting the difficulty of maintaining near-optimal solutions through search at scale. TRACS instead trades strict optimality for scalability through its directed routing structure; 6                                

> Fig. 3. Scalability under a fixed 10-minute planning budget on two large warehouses ( 207 ×457 , top; 307 ×927 , bottom). Left : largest fleet each planner completes within budget. Centre : planning time versus fleet size (log–log scale), with the 10-minute ceiling marked. Right : success rate versus maximum fleet size (bubble size ∝success rate). TRACS reaches the largest fleet size on both maps while remaining on the 100% success-rate line throughout. TABLE II LARGEST FLEET SUCCESSFULLY ROUTED WITHIN A 10-MINUTE PLANNING BUDGET . F LEET SIZE IS DOUBLED FROM 10 ROBOTS UNTIL THE FIRST UNSUCCESSFUL RUN .Planner 207 ×457 307 ×927
> Prioritized [8] 320 160 MAPF-LNS2 [6] 320 160 LaCAM [7] 1280 1280 PIBT2 [18] 2560 1280
> TRACS (ours) 5120 2560

however, as shown in Sec. III-C, this tradeoff remains small, with route lengths staying within a few percent of the optimal CBS reference for longer trips. Importantly, TRACS maintains a 100% empirical success rate across all successful runs (Fig. 3, right column), whereas PIBT2’s larger fleet ceiling on the 207 × 457 map is achieved at a reduced success rate of only 53% .As in the fixed-scene study, the planning budget is spent generating routes rather than resolving interactions between robots. Consequently, the maximum fleet size that can be ac-commodated continues to grow with the available computation time instead of saturating under increasing traffic density. 

C. Path Quality 

The use of a directed routing graph introduces one-way traffic constraints, which can increase travel distance rela-tive to unconstrained shortest paths, particularly for nearby destinations. To quantify this effect, we compare the route lengths generated by TRACS against those obtained using CBS, which produces single-agent optimal paths, on the 

81 ×125 warehouse layout. Randomly sampled start–goal pairs are grouped according to their shortest-path distance into four buckets ( 0–20 , 20 –50 , 50 –100 , and 100+ cells), and the path-length overhead is measured over repeated trials (Fig. 5). As shown in Fig. 5, the additional travel distance is con-centrated almost entirely among the shortest trips. For paths shorter than 20 cells, a single detour introduced by the one-way aisle structure represents a relatively large proportion of the overall travel distance, resulting in the highest median overhead. Beyond this range, however, the overhead rapidly decreases. For trips longer than approximately 20 cells, the median path length remains within only a few percent of the shortest-path optimum, while for the longest distance buckets it is occasionally slightly lower than the CBS baseline because CBS optimizes jointly feasible solutions rather than individual path lengths. 7         

> Fig. 4. Occupancy density (top row) and collision-event density (bottom row) for N= 500 robots, compared across all five planners. TRACS spreads traffic along the directed aisle backbone and visits the fewest total cells (top row), while its higher count of local following/goal-contention events (bottom row) reflects the edge-based scheduler actively managing junction access rather than unresolved conflicts.
> Fig. 5. Path length of TRACS versus the single-agent-optimal CBS baseline, grouped by Manhattan trip distance: (a) mean path length; (b) full distribution (box: interquartile range; whiskers: 5th–95th percentile). The one-way detour overhead is largest, in relative terms, for the shortest trips ( 0–20 cells) and shrinks to within a few percent of optimal beyond ∼20 cells, where warehouse shelf-to-workstation trips predominate.

This behavior is expected. As travel distance increases, robots have access to a larger number of feasible aisle com-binations, allowing the planner to recover routes that are effectively near-optimal despite the directional constraints. Since warehouse operations are predominantly composed of longer shelf-to-workstation transport tasks, the modest over-head observed for very short trips has only a limited impact on overall system performance while enabling substantially improved planning scalability. 

D. Traffic Analysis 

To better understand the impact of the proposed routing representation, we analyze the resulting traffic and contention patterns generated during execution. Fig. 4 compares oc-cupancy density and collision-event density across all five planners for N = 500 robots. As shown in Fig. 4, TRACS distributes traffic evenly along the directed aisle backbone and visits substantially fewer cells overall than every baseline ( 36 ,686 cell-visits, versus 44 ,957 –157 ,000 ), confirming that the alternating one-way assignment removes redundant back-and-forth travel. The collision-event heatmap shows the opposite ranking: TRACS records more local events than the baselines, not fewer. This is expected rather than a weakness, because head-on and edge-swap conflicts are already eliminated by construction, so essentially all recorded events for TRACS are following and goal-contention interactions generated precisely by the edge occupancy limits, junction reservations, and temporal headway constraints that the scheduler uses to keep execution collision-free. This confirms that the proposed representation shifts coordination away from expensive global path planning and onto lightweight, localized traffic management, trading a higher rate of cheap local queueing for markedly faster planning and lower cell occupancy. Fig. 6 consolidates all five metrics (success rate, flowtime, makespan, planning time, and local contention events) across the three fixed-scene fleet sizes ( N = 100 , 500 , 1000 ), making the trend as robot density increases directly comparable across planners. TRACS is the only planner that sustains a 100% 

success rate at every fleet size; PIBT2, the closest competitor on raw planning time, degrades from 85% at N = 100 to 

67% at N = 1000 . TRACS also keeps the lowest flowtime at every N , and its planning time grows the most gradually of all planners as N increases, widening the gap over the search- and repair-based baselines at higher density. The local contention-event count for TRACS grows faster than for the baselines, which is consistent with Fig. 4: these are junction-queueing and following events handled by the edge-based scheduler rather than unresolved collisions, and their growth reflects increasing aisle utilization rather than a degradation in solution quality, since success rate and flowtime both continue to improve relative to the baselines as N grows. IV. C ONCLUSION 

This paper introduced TRACS, a geometry-aware frame-work for scalable multi-agent path planning in structured warehouse environments. Instead of improving conflict res-olution within the conventional MAPF formulation, TRACS embeds directional traffic policies into the routing represen-tation, which eliminates head-on and edge-swap conflicts by construction and allows hybrid graph–grid routing to be decou-pled from lightweight edge-based scheduling. On large-scale 8

Fig. 6. Success rate, flowtime, makespan, planning time, and local contention events for TRACS and all baselines at N = 100 , 500 , and 1000 robots on the 

81 × 125 warehouse. TRACS is the only planner with a 100% success rate at every fleet size, and its advantage in planning time and flowtime widens as N

grows. 

warehouse benchmarks the framework consistently achieves a 100% empirical success rate while significantly improving planning scalability over representative MAPF planners. Di-rectional routing introduces a modest path-length overhead for very short trips, but this overhead rapidly diminishes with travel distance, making the approach well suited to the long-distance transport tasks that dominate robotic warehouse operations. More broadly, this work shows that exploiting domain structure through the planning representation is an effective alternative to increasingly sophisticated conflict-resolution al-gorithms. Future work will extend TRACS to dynamic task allocation, heterogeneous robot fleets, adaptive traffic policies and replanning under edge failure, and deployment in real-world warehouse environments with dynamic obstacles and execution uncertainties. REFERENCES [1] R. Stern, N. Sturtevant, A. Felner, et al., “Multi-Agent Pathfinding: Def-initions, Variants, and Benchmarks,” in Proc. Int. Symp. Combinatorial Search (SoCS) , 2019. [2] P. R. Wurman, R. D’Andrea, and M. Mountz, “Coordinating Hundreds of Cooperative, Autonomous Vehicles in Warehouses,” AI Magazine ,vol. 29, no. 1, pp. 9–20, 2008. [3] G. Sharon, R. Stern, A. Felner, and N. Sturtevant, “Conflict-Based Search for Optimal Multi-Agent Pathfinding,” Artificial Intelligence ,vol. 219, pp. 40–66, 2015. [4] J. Li, W. Ruml, and S. Koenig, “EECBS: A Bounded-Suboptimal Search for Multi-Agent Path Finding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , 2021. [5] J. Yu and S. M. LaValle, “Planning Optimal Paths for Multiple Robots on Graphs,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA) ,2013. [6] J. Li, D. Harabor, P. J. Stuckey, and H. Ma, “MAPF-LNS2: Fast Re-pairing for Multi-Agent Path Finding via Large Neighborhood Search,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , 2022. [7] K. Okumura, “LaCAM: Search-Based Algorithm for Quick Multi-Agent Pathfinding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , 2023. [8] M. Erdmann and T. Lozano-P´ erez, “On Multiple Moving Objects,” in 

Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robotics and Automation (ICRA) , 1987. [9] D. Silver, “Cooperative Pathfinding,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence and Interactive Digital Entertainment (AIIDE) , 2005. [10] L. Cohen, T. Uras, T. K. S. Kumar, and S. Koenig, “Bounded Suboptimal Multi-Agent Path Finding Using Highway Heuristics,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , 2016. [11] J. Li, D. Harabor, P. J. Stuckey, H. Ma, and S. Koenig, “Symmetry-Breaking Constraints for Grid-Based Multi-Agent Path Finding,” in 

Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , 2019. [12] H. Ma, J. Li, T. K. S. Kumar, and S. Koenig, “Lifelong Multi-Agent Path Finding for Online Pickup and Delivery Tasks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Autonomous Agents and Multiagent Systems (AAMAS) , 2017. [13] J. Li, Z. Chen, D. Harabor, P. J. Stuckey, and S. Koenig, “Lifelong Multi-Agent Path Finding in Large-Scale Warehouses,” in Proc. AAAI Conf. Artificial Intelligence , 2021. [14] G. Sartoretti, J. Kerr, Y. Shi, G. Wagner, T. K. S. Kumar, S. Koenig, and H. Choset, “PRIMAL: Pathfinding via Reinforcement and Imitation Multi-Agent Learning,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 4, no. 3, pp. 2378–2385, 2019. [15] G. Wagner and H. Choset, “M*: A Complete Multirobot Path Planning Algorithm with Performance Bounds,” in Proc. IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , 2011. [16] G. Sharon, R. Stern, M. Goldenberg, and A. Felner, “The Increasing Cost Tree Search for Optimal Multi-Agent Pathfinding,” Artificial Intel-ligence , vol. 195, pp. 470–495, 2013. [17] P. Surynek, A. Felner, R. Stern, and E. Boyarski, “Efficient SAT Approach to Multi-Agent Path Planning Under Destination Constraints,” in Proc. European Conf. Artificial Intelligence (ECAI) , 2016. 9

[18] K. Okumura, M. Machida, X. D´ efago, and Y. Tamura, “Priority Inheri-tance with Backtracking for Iterative Multi-Agent Path Finding,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters , vol. 7, no. 2, pp. 3870–3877, 2022.