Title: FRAMES: Guarded and Dual-Objective Skill Evolution for Agents in Policy-Governed Enterprise Workflows

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.01772v1

Published Time: Tue, 04 Aug 2026 01:54:48 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
## FRAMES: Guarded and Dual-Objective Skill Evolution for Agents in Policy-Governed Enterprise Workflows 

Xuhui Wang, Ruoqi Shu, Chen Dan, Tianhua Xu, Mengxi Luo, Yanming Mai, Bo Wan 

BMO Financial Group 

{xuhuieric.wang, ruoqi.shu, chendaisy.dan, TianhuaMatthew.Xu, Mengxi.Luo, yanming.mai, bo.wan}@bmo.com 

Abstract 

LLM agents increasingly run policy-bound en-terprise workflows such as document audit-ing, where they must apply rules consistently, ground every value, and stay auditable. Im-proving these agents is hard: operational feed-back is sparse and unlabeled, edits to one rule can regress unrelated cases, and accuracy must improve without inflating inference cost or losing auditability. We present FRAMES ,a closed-loop framework that cold-starts de-ployable skills from existing assets and then evolves them through consensus-based muta-tion, Pareto selection over accuracy and cost, and a per-category non-regression guard—all while preserving auditability. Deployed on our internal production system, FRAMES attains the best accuracy–cost trade-off among base-lines, with the same gains reproduced on τ -bench. 

1 Introduction 

Large language models now enable structured plan-ning and multi step reasoning (Wei et al., 2022). With agents that invoke tools for end to end execu-tion (Yao et al., 2023) and skills as explicit, branch-ing procedures with built in checks (Wang et al., 2024; Li et al., 2026), they bring programmable business automation within reach. Agents already run policy-bound workflows such as document auditing, case validation, and customer service (Shu et al., 2025; Zwerdling et al., 2025). Yet in regulated production, agents can-not reliably apply rules consistently, ground every value, and avoid stalling in loops (Yao et al., 2025). The obvious fixes may fail: rechecking outputs by hand undoes the automation, fine-tuning is expen-sive and data-hungry, and tuning a flat prompt gives too little control. Editing the agent’s skills is more controllable, but reliable skill improvement is it-self an open problem. Failure feedback is sparse and unlabeled. Fixes interact so patching one case breaks another. Cost matters as much as accuracy at high volume. Changes must stay auditable and de-ployable without a rebuild. Existing skill-evolution methods (Alzubi et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026; Xia et al., 2026a) struggle to meet these requirements. We introduce FRAMES (Feedback-driven 

Reasoning with Adaptive Mutation and Evolution of Skills), a closed-loop framework that contin-uously evolves an agent’s skills under the gov-ernance constraints of regulated enterprise work-flows. It takes as input the enterprise’s policies and, when available, operational feedback from exist-ing business-process systems (past case outcomes, reviewer notes, or failure logs), and improves the skills without retraining models. It operates in two phases (Figure 1): a cold start turns existing enterprise assets into a deployable skill bank and an evaluation benchmark, and an evolution loop 

periodically re-improves the responsible skills un-der a per-category non-regression guard, deploying to agents with no human re-authoring. Because FRAMES evolves the agent’s skills rather than its interface, the same framework applies whether the agent operates autonomously or through dialogue. Its contributions are built along two lines. Mech-anisms. FRAMES evolves skills via four designs. 

Feedback structuring turns feedback into scorable cases that serve as both diagnostic signal and eval-uation benchmark. Consensus mutation runs a population of independent diagnosers and retains fixes by their agreement, filtering out noise. Dual-objective evolution Pareto-optimizes accuracy and cost, yielding a configurable deployment menu. And per-category anti-regression holds every cat-egory at its baseline and turns each newly fixed case into a permanent regression test. Deployment. 

FRAMES fits real enterprises: it cold-starts from policies, even without feedback; every change is a versioned, auditable natural-language diff for compliance review; and it automatically plugs into 

existing agent systems without a rebuild. 1arXiv:2608.01772v1 [cs.AI] 3 Aug 2026 We deploy and evaluate FRAMES on our inter-nal financial document-auditing system ( FinDAS )in real production. On production cases, FRAMES delivers the best accuracy-cost trade-off; the trend is reproduced on the public τ -bench, confirming the approach generalizes beyond our deployment. 

2 Related Work 

The closest methods improve an agent’s behavior with skills built from its own execution, and fall into two families. One keeps the model frozen: since prompting a model to write its own skills in one pass barely helps (Li et al., 2026), later frame-works analyze execution traces and failures to re-fine skill files iteratively (Alzubi et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026; Ni et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2026a; Memento Team, 2026), including for financial rea-soning (Yim et al., 2026). The other treats skills as scaffolding for reinforcement learning, updat-ing model weights (Xia et al., 2026a,b; Lu et al., 2026) but yielding opaque parameters costly to audit and roll back. However, neither line is de-signed for regulated deployment where policy com-pliance and auditability are required. Concurrently, GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2026) and GRASP (Moll et al., 2026) advance frozen-model prompt/skill op-timization with reflective mutation and regression-aware gating, while a recent survey (Xu and Yan, 2026) flags skill selection at scale and skill reusabil-ity as open challenges. These methods optimize a fixed artifact against a static development set; they do not target cold start from policy, continuous pro-duction feedback, cost as a co-objective, or lifetime anti-regression memory—the deployment-lifecycle requirements FRAMES addresses (§A.10). Prior compliant systems enforce symbolic rules over doc-uments (Shu et al., 2025), compile policy into run-time guards (Zwerdling et al., 2025), adapt under human oversight (He et al., 2025), or harvest pro-duction signals into improvement flywheels (Zhao et al., 2025)—but none improve the skills them-selves. FRAMES bridges this gap: it grounds skill evolution in operational feedback, adds cost as a co-objective and a per-category non-regression guard, and turns policy and feedback into better skills offline—unique in the frozen-model family. 

3 Method 

3.1 Problem Formulation 

We pose skill evolution as a dual-objective opti-mization over the skill bank S = {s1, . . . , s L} that Continuous Upate    

> Cold Start
> Inputs for evolution
> Structured
> Cases
> Skill Bank
> Policy
> Documents
> Raw
> Operational
> Feedback Evolution Loop
> Refines and evolves
> skills based on the
> operational feedback
> Fresh Operational
> Feedback
> Fresh notes from failure
> logs and policy update
> Policy AI Agent
> Executes cases using
> the current skill bank
> and generates results
> Skill Bank
> Final Output
> Best Skill
> Set
> Resolved
> Cases
> Regression
> Pool Deploy to agent
> Merge into skill bank and regression pool

Figure 1: Overview of the FRAMES pipeline. The cold start (§3.2) turns the policy corpus and any operational feedback into a skill bank and a set of structured cases for learning and evaluation. The evolution loop (§3.3– §3.6) then improves the skills implicated by the current cases and writes them back into the skill bank. Subse-quent runs fire periodically on feedback accumulated since the last run, or on policy changes; the skill bank persists across runs. 

backs the agent at serving time. Because the under-lying model is fixed, the correctness and cost of ex-ecuting real business cases are mainly determined by S. We evaluate S on a set of cases, running each n times to absorb LLM stochasticity, which yields pass rate PR (S) scored with the unbiased pass@ k estimator (Chen et al., 2021a) and cost Cost (S) as the average LLM token consumption per case. Cases are partitioned into operational cat-egories C that reflect heterogeneous business risks (e.g., routine validation vs. high-impact escalation), and pass rate is reported per category as PR c(S)

for c ∈ C . FRAMES jointly maximizes pass rate and minimizes cost, subject to a per-category non-regression constraint: 

max 

S

 PR (S), −Cost (S)

s.t. PR c(S) ≥ PR c(S0) ∀c ∈ C (1) where S0 is the skill bank at the start of evolution. Because pass rate and cost can conflict, FRAMES optimizes in the Pareto sense during evolution (§3.6). In practice, each run edits not S as a whole but a working scope P ⊆ S relevant to current op-erational signals; improved P∗ is committed back, and as S0 advances with each successful run, the constraint locks in gains over the system’s lifetime. The following sections detail the full system. 

3.2 Cold Start from Enterprise Assets Skill generation. An LLM splits policy docu-ments Π along procedural boundaries and rewrites 2Figure 2: The evolution loop of FRAMES, which maintains a Pareto frontier of candidate skill sets trading off pass rate and cost. Each iteration draws a parent from the frontier and lets a population of diagnosers analyze feedback against it in parallel; their proposals are consolidated into a single edit plan that rewrites the parent into a child set. The child must first clear a per-category non-regression gate (Eq. 2), evaluated against both current cases and a subset of regression pool that accumulates previously resolved cases, and then survive Pareto dominance (Eq. 3) to enter the frontier; the loop then proceeds to the next iteration. Once stopping criteria are met, the best skill set is committed back to the skill bank, and its resolved cases join the regression pool. 

Algorithm 1 FRAMES Evolution Run                                                                                            

> Require: Skill bank S, structured cases F, regression pool
> R, iteration budget T, population N, patience τ
> 1: P0←RETRIEVE (S,F)▷Working scope from S
> 2: E0←EVALUATE (P0,F)▷Anchor non-regression 3: frontier ← { (P0,E0)}
> 4: for t= 1 , . . . , T do
> 5: P ← SELECT PARENT (frontier , t )▷Non-greedy 6: {B i}Ni=1 ←PARTITION (F, N, t )▷Reshuffled per iteration 7: {δi}Ni=1 ←DIAGNOSE (P,{B i}Ni=1 )▷Parallel 8: ˆδ←CONSOLIDATE ({δi}Ni=1 )▷Consensus 9: P′←REWRITE (P,ˆδ)
> 10: E′←EVALUATE (P′,F ∪ SAMPLE (R))
> 11: if GATE (E′,E0)then
> 12: frontier ←PARETO UPDATE (frontier ,P′,E′)
> 13: end if
> 14: if no improvement for τiterations then break
> 15: end if
> 16: end for
> 17: P∗←SELECT FROM FRONTIER (frontier )
> 18: R∗← { f∈ F :P∗passes f}▷Cases resolved by P∗
> 19: return P∗,R∗

each segment into a self-contained skill sl aligned with one verifiable business activity, yielding a skill bank S = {s1, . . . , s L} (prompts in §A.4.1). The bank is flat-stored, tag-indexed, and reference-composed : skills sit at one level, are indexed by free-form tags for soft grouping, and express cross-skill dependencies as references. This avoids the cascading re-review that hierarchical edits impose under regulated change management. Each sl fur-ther carries a description dl (the field retrieval scores against, §3.3) and a back-link to its authorita-tive clause in Π, making any agent action traceable to source policy. 

Feedback triage and bootstrap. FRAMES first synthesizes a baseline case set from Π: an LLM identifies policy clauses whose expected behavior is not yet exercised by S and drafts a case for each (prompt in §A.4.2). Every case fi = ( mi, t i) cou-ples a diagnostic record mi—a natural-language description of the targeted failure mode together with any annotation of root cause—with an evalu-ation task ti, an executable scenario whose rubric encodes the ground-truth outcome. When raw oper-ational feedback Fraw ̸ = ∅, an LLM classifier splits it by executability: experiential knowledge K (ad-vice without a reproducible setup) is attached to the relevant skill as supplementary context (details in A.4.3); the remainder is structured into additional cases of the same (mi, t i) form and merged with the synthetic baseline to yield F = {fi}.

Continuous feedback ingestion. The triage above is a one-time event at system introduction, sorting through the mixed backlog of cases and free-form lessons that legacy systems leave behind. Between successive evolution runs, new cases are ingested into F from three channels: human review 

(reviewer notes, overrides, annotations on agent decisions); automated trajectory analysis (inspec-tion of agent execution traces); and policy updates 

(amendments to Π diffed against S to surface un-covered clauses). Each channel has its specific LLM-driven converter that refines its raw artifacts into cases of the same (mi, t i) form (see prompt in §A.4.4 and §A.5.2 for a worked example). 

3.3 Skill Retrieval and Baseline Anchoring 

We now detail the evolution loop (Figure 2; Al-gorithm 1), which begins by retrieving a working skill set P0 ⊆ S from the skill bank given the cur-rent case set F. Each case’s diagnostic record mi

serves as a retrieval query against skill descriptions 

{dl} via hybrid semantic–lexical scoring (BM25). Skills are ranked by aggregated relevance across all cases; the top-k form P0, frozen for the run so 3cross-iteration comparisons reflect content quality rather than scope drift. P0 is scored on {ti} to obtain baseline E0 = ( PR (P0), Cost (P0)) , which anchors the non-regression gate for admitting sub-sequent children (§3.5) and seeds the Pareto fron-tier for retaining non-dominated candidates across iterations (§3.6), as {(P0, E0)}.

3.4 Guarded Mutation 

Each evolution iteration produces a child P′ in four steps. Parent selection. A parent skill set P is drawn round-robin over current frontier members so every member gets equal turns at producing chil-dren; this non-greedy schedule prevents the search from collapsing onto one end of the accuracy–cost trade-off. Distributed diagnosis. FRAMES parti-tions the diagnostic records {mi} into N disjoint batches B1, . . . , BN , reshuffled every iteration, and runs one LLM-based diagnoser per batch. Each diagnoser sees the full parent P plus its Bi, local-izes skill-level root causes, and emits a proposal 

δi = ( targets i, root_cause i, plans i). This batch-ing exploits two complementary axes of diversity: across diagnosers, disjoint {B i} yield independent diagnoses that consolidation aggregates—akin to bagging; across iterations, regrouping lets corre-lated failures co-occur in fresh combinations, ex-posing root causes a fixed partition would obscure— an exploration over case groupings that comple-ments the frontier search. Consolidation. A con-solidator first applies a vote filter, then makes one LLM call to merge the retained proposals into a unified plan ˆδ. The three modes trade breadth for precision: none passes all proposals through; the default per-skill voting (section ) drops any skill edit proposed by fewer than q diagnosers; and 

cluster additionally requires agreement on the exact target set. Skill improvement. For each targeted sj ∈ P , FRAMES retrieves from R, the regression pool, a small set of anchor cases whose resolution depends on sj , and includes them in the rewrite prompt as behavioral constraints to prevent catastrophic forgetting. An LLM then rewrites the procedure under ˆδ to obtain s′ 

> j

. The prompt ex-poses the target’s full SKILL.md, its anchor cases, sibling skills as one-line summaries, and its auxil-iary file inventory—preventing duplication, bound-ary violations, and catastrophic forgetting of pre-viously learned behavior. Untouched skills carry over: P′ = ( P \ { sj }j∈ˆδ) ∪ { s′ 

> j

}j∈ˆδ Because the edit unit is a natural-language procedure, every change is a readable diff a compliance officer can approve and is versioned, leaving a full audit trail. The resulting child P′ then proceeds to scoring to determine whether it joins the frontier. 

3.5 Scoring and Admission 

FRAMES evaluates P′ on {ti} plus a sampled sub-set of the regression pool—sized at 50% of the cur-rent evaluation set to keep per-iteration cost stable as the pool grows (Appendix A.9)—with an agent blind to {mi}. The per-category non-regression ad-mission gate is a safety filter, not a competition: it asks only whether the child preserves a hard quality floor anchored at P0. The child clears the gate if PR c(P′) ≥ (1 − ϵ) PR c(P0) ∀ c ∈ C , (2) where ϵ absorbs evaluation noise. The bound is per-category to defeat the masking effect : a flat total can hide a regression in one category offset by a gain in another, and in regulated workflows, categories carry asymmetric business risk. Anchoring at P0

rather than the running parent matters because the latter would let the worst-case floor decay as (1 −

ϵ)t over t iterations, eroding the gate’s protection. 

3.6 Dual-Objective Frontier 

A gate-clearing child does not enter the frontier automatically; it must win a Pareto competition. Because accuracy and cost can trade off, produc-tion deployments need a range of operating points: high-value cases justify expensive skill sets while bulk screening needs cheap ones. FRAMES there-fore maintains a frontier of skill sets that are non-dominated under 

a ≻ b ⇐⇒ o(a) ≥ o(b) ∧ o(a)̸ = o(b), (3) where o = ( PR , −Cost ) is the objective vector, ≥

is componentwise. Each iteration, a gate-clearing child enters the frontier only if no incumbent dom-inates it; any members it dominates are then re-moved, and the frontier is capped at a fixed size. Evolution stops when no child has been pro-moted for τ consecutive iterations, leaving the fron-tier as a deployment menu spanning the accuracy– cost trade-off. Operators select the operating point matching a workload’s risk and budget; the chosen 

P∗ is committed back to S in place of P0, and its resolved cases are merged into R.

4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Datasets & Environments. FRAMES is evalu-ated on FinDAS, a production system that audits 4the financial documents—i.e., income documents, tax forms, and financial statements—submitted with mortgate applications. The evaluation output of each case is a verdict with supporting evidence. Public document-QA benchmarks (Mathew et al., 2021; Opsahl-Ong et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2021b) pose static questions with fixed per-document gold answers over relatively clean documents; there, feedback from a wrong answer is a local cor-rection to that case, with no global policy to reuse. By contrast, FinDAS spans heterogeneous, noisy enterprise-level documents and applies cross-cutting policies across all of them. Rules de-rived from these policies chain fields across pages with conditional, cross-field, and arithmetic checks, making the policy agent prone to missing edge cases under ambiguous wording and hallucinating ungrounded values (Shu et al., 2025). In deploy-ment, experts flag a wrong case and its expected output but not the abstract edit it implies, which the system must generalize into a reusable rule without breaking previously-correct decisions. Per-document QA therefore cannot test what FRAMES is built to do—turn case-by-case feedback into global policy edits under regression control. Cases from the FinDAS production workflow fall into three categories: general covers routine cases with both correct outputs and minor errors; hallucination refers to responses not grounded in source documents; and special captures edge cases not explicitly covered by policy (§A.5.1). We sam-ple two disjoint sets of 210 cases each (70 per cate-gory) so that each category supplies an equal learn-ing signal: an evolution set and a held-out test set (§A.7.1). All experiments are run on τ -bench (Yao et al., 2025) for consistency: we port FinDAS into the benchmark as a new domain, and additionally evaluate on its original retail and airline domains as a generalization probe under a similar setup; details are in §A.8. Agent execution and evaluation are both built on DeepAgents (LangChain, 2024); 

Default Configuration. All FRAMES modules run on Claude Sonnet 4.6 (Anthropic, 2026) with thinking enabled, including the policy agent for candidate evaluation, which is the same one used in FinDAS. FRAMES’s full default settings and hyperparameters are listed in §A.6. 

Metrics. We instantiate PR as average pass@ k,reported over all cases with 95% bootstrap con-fidence intervals ( B=10 ,000 ) and per category (PR c), and Cost as average inference cost in to-                                               

> Quality (avg. pass@ k)Inf. Cost Method Gen ↑Hall ↑Spec ↑Total ↑k tok / case ↓
> Raw LLM 0.59 0.04 0.00 0.21 [.16,.27] 375.63 | 4.28 LLM skills 0.66 0.04 0.00 0.23 [.18,.29] 341.47 | 4.22 Human skills 0.71 0.66 0.43 0.60 [.53,.67] 412.34 | 4.41 Batch update 0.74 0.71 0.51 0.66 [.59,.72] 332.15 | 4.23 AutoSkill 0.79 0.80 0.54 0.71 [.65,.77] 337.82 | 6.48
> FRAMES 0.86 0.91 0.63 0.80 [.74,.85] 349.16 | 4.06
> Table 1: Main comparison on the held-out FinDAS test set (pass@ k,k=3 ). Total is the average across the three equally sized categories. Inference cost is in thousands of tokens ( k), input | output. Bold marks our method.

kens over all cases and all k runs (Eq. 1). Every baseline and FRAMES pay this inference cost at deployment; only evolution-loop methods pay an additional one-time evolve cost, reported in abla-tion (Section 4.3). 

4.2 Main Results 

We compare five baselines. B1 Raw LLM : the pol-icy agent with policies Π supplied in its prompt and no skill bank S. B2 LLM skills : Π converted into S by an LLM. B3 Human skills : the same converted S with domain experts reviewed and edited. B4 Batch update : F processed together in a single evolve step. B5 AutoSkill (Yang et al., 2026), a prior skill-evolution method. B3–B5 and FRAMES all start from the same B2 seed S, F,and base policy agent, differing only in how S is improved—human editing (B3), or skill evolution (B4, B5, FRAMES). We do not include a baseline that processes feedback one item at a time, since its O(|F| ) re-evaluation passes are infeasible at production scale. Table 1 shows B1 and B2 collapse on halluci-nation and special cases (to ≤ 0.04 ). The policy agent fails because the source policies, written for human auditors, neither abstract rules into a gen-eral, non-conflicting form nor make edge cases and grounding explicit. B3’s manual edits recover much of hallucination and special, but relying on intuition rather than systematic re-scoring, leave coverage uneven and unscalable, at the highest input cost of any method. The feedback-driven methods (B4, B5) evolve B2 further, improving monotonically, with the largest gains on halluci-nation. FRAMES reaches the best overall pass rate, leading the strongest baseline B5 in every cat-egory by 0.07 –0.11 (paired McNemar p=0 .0026 ;§A.7.2). Figure 3 (left) shows the same ordering across k=1 →3, not just at the reported k=3 . Input 5Quality (average pass@ k, ∆ vs. default) Cost (k tokens) Hyperparameter Setting General ↑ Hallucination ↑ Special ↑ Total ↑ Inference/case ↓ Evolution/iter ↓

Default 0.857 0.829 0.600 0.762 [.70,.82] 354.632 | 4.063 80.213 | 24.183 

S1 Batch Size 1 0.829 −.028 0.829 ±.000 0.514 −.086 0.724 −.038 [.66,.78] 402.347 | 4.252 379.264 | 63.418 4 0.571 −.286 0.757 −.072 0.457 −.143 0.595 −.167 [.53,.66] 349.285 | 4.524 113.847 | 29.847 20 0.657 −.200 0.543 −.286 0.457 −.143 0.552 −.210 [.49,.62] 365.423 | 3.942 48.315 | 15.312 40 0.814 −.043 0.786 −.043 0.571 −.029 0.724 −.038 [.66,.78] 453.216 | 4.418 36.124 | 10.847 S2 Selection Strategy Greedy 0.857 ±.000 0.771 −.058 0.514 −.086 0.714 −.048 [.65,.77] 342.817 | 4.214 79.437 | 22.418 S3 Consensus Filter Cluster 0.771 −.086 0.843 +.014 0.543 −.057 0.719 −.043 [.66,.78] 361.847 | 4.038 77.834 | 22.637 None 0.829 −.028 0.771 −.058 0.600 ±.000 0.733 −.029 [.67,.79] 360.124 | 3.904 82.541 | 24.712 S4 Regression Tolerance 0% 0.800 −.057 0.829 ±.000 0.614 +.014 0.748 −.014 [.69,.80] 372.918 | 4.298 79.184 | 21.234 100% 0.829 −.028 0.800 −.029 0.600 ±.000 0.743 −.019 [.66,.78] 382.564 | 3.978 78.912 | 23.574 

Table 2: Hyperparameter ablations on the FinDAS test set (pass@ k, k=3 ), each block varying one knob from FRAMES Default settings (top row). Quality cells show the change ( ∆ vs. default)—green gain, red drop; cost columns report input | output tokens in thousands ( k). 1 2 3  

> k
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> Average Pass@k
> B1: Raw LLM
> B2: LLM Skills
> B3: Human Skills
> B4: Batch Update
> B5: AutoSkill
> FRAMES
> 123
> k
> 0.45
> 0.50
> 0.55
> 0.60
> 0.65
> 0.70
> 0.75
> S1 (B=1)
> S1 (B=4)
> S1 (B=20)
> S1 (B=40)
> S2: Greedy
> S3: Cluster
> S3: None
> S4: Tol. 0%
> S4: Tol. 100%
> Default

Figure 3: Average total pass@ k over all cases ( k=1 to 

3) on the held-out FinDAS test set. Left : baselines and FRAMES (Table 1). Right : ablation settings (Table 2). FRAMES with its default setting stay on top at every k.

cost stays in the same band across methods, while FRAMES has the lowest output cost; B5 spends 

60% more. Since output tokens dominate per-call latency, FRAMES holds an advantage on both ac-curacy and deployment latency. 

4.3 Ablation Study 

To quantify the contribution of each module and setting, we sweep four hyperparameters (S1–S4) one at a time from the default configuration, re-sampling only the evolution set to 40 cases (same category ratio) to keep the sweep affordable and evolve costs comparable across S1. S1 Batch size 

|B i|: from 1 (finest) to 40 (coarsest, whole set in one batch). S2 Selection strategy : the default Pareto frontier ( |frontier |≤ 3) versus greedy single-incumbent search ( |frontier |≤ 1). S3 Consensus filter : section (default), cluster (stricter), none 

(no filter). S4 Regression tolerance ϵ: 0% (strict), 

5% (default), 100% (unconstrained). Table 2 shows no variant dominates the default: every alternative lowers total pass@ k, and the two that beat it in a single category give up more else-where. Figure 3 (right) shows the default stays ahead across k=1 →3. (S1) Batch size is the most sensitive knob, yet no alternative improves total pass@ k; the finest batching multiplies evolve cost 

4.7× in input tokens, and the coarsest, cheapest to evolve, carries the highest inference input cost. (S2, S3) Greedy selection and both directions of the con-sensus filter—stricter (cluster) and off (none)—all lower total pass@ k, so frontier search contributes and section sits at the better operating point; clus-ter buys hallucination at a larger loss on general and special. (S4) Both ends fail: 0% rejects useful intermediate edits, while 100% lets any category drop without limit. Selection sees only total accu-racy and cost, so a badly regressed child can still enter the frontier, steering later iterations into that branch and leaving the frontier points unsafe to de-ploy. Inference cost per case otherwise varies little, so the default’s lead does not come from spending more at inference, and the remaining spread falls on the one-time evolve cost. 

5 Conclusion 

FRAMES shows that agent skills, evolved under a per-category non-regression guard, are a practical unit of continuous improvement for regulated agent deployments. Every change is a reviewable diff, and the Pareto frontier offers a cost–accuracy menu rather than a single take-it-or-leave-it upgrade. The only requirement is a policy corpus and feedback, making the framework applicable beyond the finan-cial domain we evaluate on. The dominant scaling bottleneck is per-iteration evaluation cost; smarter sampling and proxy scoring are the clear avenues for future work. 66 Ethical Considerations 

This research was conducted on a proprietary dataset of financial documents, with all data fully anonymized and handled under strict institutional privacy protocols. We acknowledge the poten-tial for algorithmic bias in automated financial decision-making. FRAMES is deliberately de-signed to reduce this risk: every behavioral change it makes is a versioned, human-readable natural-language diff that a compliance officer can re-view and approve, and its non-regression guard prevents an update from silently degrading any risk category—together enhancing transparency and preserving human accountability. Neverthe-less, any production deployment would still require rigorous, ongoing audits for demographic bias to ensure fair and equitable outcomes. 

7 Limitations 

Evaluation limited by benchmark scarcity. No public benchmark tests what FRAMES targets, the closest option, document-QA, only asks fixed ques-tions over documents and does not test skill exe-cution (§4.1). We therefore use two sources: real cases from our production system (FinDAS), and the public τ -bench adapted to this setting. Both are limited—FinDAS cases must be anonymized and pass compliance review before being used, and 

τ -bench needs nontrivial adaptation and offers few cases. FRAMES improves consistently on both, so what limits our evaluation is the lack of suitable benchmarks, not the method; we leave larger-scale evaluation to future work. 

Dependence on feedback quality. FRAMES learns from operational feedback, so its gains scale with feedback quality—large under accurate, domain-specific feedback, smaller under sparse or noisy signal (e.g., τ -bench retail). Consensus mu-tation and the per-category gate discard unreliable edits: this keeps quality safe but accepts fewer ed-its, so improvement is slower. A dedicated agent that curates feedback before evolution could ease this dependence; we leave it to future work. 

No model fine-tuning. Because FRAMES freezes the model and edits only skills, it cannot add capabilities the base model lacks. This is de-liberate: it avoids the training cost and labeled data that fine-tuning needs (often substantial in enterprise settings), and keeps every change an au-ditable natural-language diff that deploys where fine-tuning is impractical. 

Evaluation dominates loop cost. Re-scoring ev-ery case across multiple trials through a full agent run makes evaluation one to two orders of mag-nitude costlier than all other modules combined, which currently caps the loop at a few hundred cases. This cost buys the non-regression guard— real re-scoring, not heuristics, holds each cate-gory’s floor—and is paid once during evolution, never at deployment. Cheaper surrogate evaluators are a natural way to relax it. 7References 

Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. 2026. Gepa: Reflective prompt evolu-tion can outperform reinforcement learning. Preprint ,arXiv:2507.19457. Salaheddin Alzubi, Noah Provenzano, Jaydon Bingham, Weiyuan Chen, and Tu Vu. 2026. EvoSkill: Auto-mated skill discovery for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02766 .Anthropic. 2026. Claude sonnet 4.6. https://www. anthropic.com/news/claude-sonnet-4-6 . Ac-cessed: 2026-06-16. Mark Chen, Jerry Tworek, Heewoo Jun, Qiming Yuan, Henrique Ponde de Oliveira Pinto, Jared Kaplan, Harri Edwards, Yuri Burda, Nicholas Joseph, Greg Brockman, and 1 others. 2021a. Evaluating large language models trained on code. arXiv preprint arXiv:2107.03374 .Zhiyu Chen, Wenhu Chen, Charese Smiley, Sameena Shah, Iana Borova, Dylan Langdon, Reema Moussa, Matt Beane, Ting-Hao Huang, Bryan Routledge, and William Yang Wang. 2021b. FinQA: A dataset of nu-merical reasoning over financial data. In Proceedings of the 2021 Conference on Empirical Methods in Nat-ural Language Processing , pages 3697–3711, Online and Punta Cana, Dominican Republic. Association for Computational Linguistics. Soheil Feizi. 2026. Continual learning for AI agents: How to actually build it. RELAI Blog, https://relai.ai/blog/ continual-learning-for-ai-agents . Accessed: 2026-07-30. Yufei He, Ruoyu Li, Alex Chen, Yue Liu, Yulin Chen, Yuan Sui, Cheng Chen, Yi Zhu, Luca Luo, Frank Yang, and Bryan Hooi. 2025. Enabling self-improving agents to learn at test time with human-in-the-loop guidance. In Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Lan-guage Processing: Industry Track , pages 1625–1653, Suzhou (China). Association for Computational Lin-guistics. LangChain. 2024. Deep agents. https://github. com/langchain-ai/deepagents . Accessed: 2026-06-15. Xiangyi Li, Wenbo Chen, Yimin Liu, Shenghan Zheng, Xiaokun Chen, Yifeng He, Yubo Li, Bin-gran You, Haotian Shen, Jiankai Sun, and 1 oth-ers. 2026. SkillsBench: Benchmarking how well agent skills work across diverse tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.12670 .Zhengxi Lu, Zhiyuan Yao, Jinyang Wu, Chengcheng Han, Qi Gu, Xunliang Cai, Weiming Lu, Jun Xiao, Yueting Zhuang, and Yongliang Shen. 2026. Skill0: In-context agentic reinforcement learning for skill internalization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.02268 .Minesh Mathew, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and C. V. Jawa-har. 2021. DocVQA: A dataset for VQA on docu-ment images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Win-ter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV) , pages 2200–2209. Memento Team. 2026. Memento-Skills: Let agents design agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.18743 .Johannes Moll, Jean-Philippe Corbeil, Jiazhen Pan, Martin Hadamitzky, Daniel Rueckert, Lisa Adams, and Keno Bressem. 2026. Grasp: Gated regression-aware skill proposer for self-improving llm agents. 

Preprint , arXiv:2605.29668. Jingwei Ni, Yihao Liu, Xinpeng Liu, Yutao Sun, Mengyu Zhou, and 1 others. 2026. Trace2Skill: Dis-till trajectory-local lessons into transferable agent skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25158 .Krista Opsahl-Ong and 1 others. 2026. OfficeQA pro: An enterprise benchmark for end-to-end grounded reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.08655 .Ruoqi Shu, Xuhui Wang, Isaac Wang, Yanming Mai, and Bo Wan. 2025. LAVA: Logic-aware validation and augmentation framework for large-scale financial document auditing. In Proceedings of The 10th Work-shop on Financial Technology and Natural Language Processing , pages 75–92, Suzhou, China. Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Chenxi Wang, Zhuoyun Yu, Xin Xie, Wuguannan Yao, Runnan Fang, and 1 others. 2026a. SkillX: Automat-ically constructing skill knowledge bases for agents. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.04804 .Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Man-dlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. 2024. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. Trans-actions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR) .Jiongxiao Wang, Qiaojing Yan, Yawei Wang, Yijun Tian, Soumya Smruti Mishra, Zhichao Xu, Megha Gandhi, Panpan Xu, and Lin Lee Cheong. 2026b. Re-inforcement learning for self-improving agent with skill library. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meet-ing of the Association for Computational Linguistics (ACL) . ArXiv:2512.17102. Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc V Le, Denny Zhou, and 1 others. 2022. Chain-of-thought prompting elic-its reasoning in large language models. Advances in neural information processing systems , 35:24824– 24837. Peng Xia, Jianwen Chen, Hanyang Wang, Jiaqi Liu, and 1 others. 2026a. SkillRL: Evolving agents via recur-sive skill-augmented reinforcement learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.08234 .

8Peng Xia, Jianwen Chen, Xinyu Yang, Haoqin Tu, and 1 others. 2026b. MetaClaw: Just talk – an agent that meta-learns and evolves in the wild. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.17187 .Renjun Xu and Yang Yan. 2026. Agent skills for large language models: Architecture, acquisition, security, and the path forward. Preprint , arXiv:2602.12430. Yutao Yang, Junsong Li, Qianjun Pan, Bihao Zhan, and 1 others. 2026. AutoSkill: Experience-driven life-long learning via skill self-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.01145 .Shunyu Yao, Noah Shinn, Pedram Razavi, and Karthik Narasimhan. 2025. τ -bench: A benchmark for tool-agent-user interaction in real-world domains. In In-ternational Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) .Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao. 2023. ReAct: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In The Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations .Tik Yu Yim, Wenting Tan, Sum Yee Chan, Tak-Wah Lam, and Siu Ming Yiu. 2026. ASDA: Automated skill distillation and adaptation for financial reason-ing. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.16112 .Cen Zhao, Tiantian Zhang, Hanchen Su, Yufeng Zhang, Shaowei Su, Mingzhi Xu, Yu Liu, Wei Han, Jeremy Werner, Claire Na Cheng, and Yashar Mehdad. 2025. Agent-in-the-loop: A data flywheel for continuous improvement in LLM-based customer support. In 

Proceedings of the 2025 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 1919–1930, Suzhou (China). Associa-tion for Computational Linguistics. Naama Zwerdling, David Boaz, Ella Rabinovich, Guy Uziel, David Amid, and Ateret Anaby Tavor. 2025. Towards enforcing company policy adherence in agentic workflows. In Proceedings of the 2025 Con-ference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing: Industry Track , pages 595–606, Suzhou (China). Association for Computational Linguistics. 

9A Appendix 

A.1 Sample FinDAS Documents 

Figure 4 shows two synthetic document examples, a paystub and a tax slip, constructed to resemble documents processed by the FinDAS. All contents are fictitious and are included solely for illustrative purposes. Real-world documents exhibit greater diversity in layout, formatting, visual quality, and content complexity. 

(a) Sample tax slip 

(b) Sample paystub 

Figure 4: Synthetic paystub and tax slip samples used to illustrate the audit skills in §A.2.1 and §A.2.2. 

A.2 FinDAS Skill Corpus and Representative Examples 

FinDAS is governed by 78 policy documents span-ning loan underwriting, payroll auditing, tax com-pliance, and fraud detection, from which a library of over 100 executable skills is derived across 23 document types (e.g., paystubs, tax slips, bank statements, employment letters, and property ap-praisals). Policy documents vary widely in length and complexity, collectively specifying thousands of compliance requirements at varying levels of granularity — from single-field validation rules to complex cross-document consistency checks. To provide concrete insight into skill structure and evolution, we present two representative ex-amples for paystub and tax slip audit. For each, we provide the initial skill derived from policy documentation and the evolved version produced by FRAMES, illustrating how iterative feedback-driven optimization refines grounding rules, edge-case handling, and audit precision while preserving the underlying compliance structure. 

A.2.1 Paystub Auditing Skill 

Below is the initial skill and its evolved successor for paystub auditing. Both follow the same vali-dation structure and output schema; the evolved skill adds more precise grounding rules: an explicit printed-line contract for the stated field, a salary-vs-hourly skip branch, flexible-subset gross-pay reconciliation, and a no-derivation rule for all total fields. The tool groups are sketched in §A.3. 

SKILL.md — initial            

> name paystub-audit-initial
> description Verify a paystub for payroll fraud indica-tors. Triggers on user request and paystub auditing.
> Paystub Audit
> This skill identifies document inconsistencies, missing fields, calculation anomalies, and payroll compliance issues.
> Inputs
> •application_id
> •document_type = "paystub"
> •documents (images + OCR results)
> Step 1 — Parse Query and Resolve Paths Extract application_id and document_type . Call
> ‘get_document_paths(...)‘ ; stop and report if retrieval fails.
> Step 2 — Prepare Audit Context Initialize the fixed-key output skeleton and extract document representations:

10 extract_table_structure ( image_path ) read_document_image ( image_path ) 

Check 1 — Field Presence A document omitting key fields (employer, payment date, regular pay) may signal manipulation. Call 

‘extract_document_fields(..., doc_type="paystub")‘ ;store each result as {valid, value} . . . . 

Check 2 — Arithmetic Consistency Fraudulent edits often update one value without adjusting derived totals. Verify: 

current_base_pay = rate x hours_worked current_net_pay = gross_pay - deductions 

Skip sub-checks where an operand is missing or non-numeric. . . . 

Check N — Employment Insurance Ceiling A YTD EI value above the statutory ceiling is impossible under a legitimate payroll run. Use ‘check_ei‘ . . . . 

Output 

Fixed-schema JSON, one keyed section per check: 

{" expected_fields ": {...} , " current_base_pay ": {...} , ... , " ei ": {...} }

SKILL.md — evolved 

name paystub-audit-evolved 

description Verify a paystub for fraud signals using image and OCR data. Triggers on: “check paystub”, “verify pay stub”, “paystub fraud”, or any paystub fraud-detection request. 

Paystub Auditing 

Verify a paystub for fraud signals. Work through the checks in order; write each result to the output file before proceeding. 

Inputs 

• application_id 

• document_type = "paystub" 

• documents (images + OCR results) 

Step 1 — Parse Query and Resolve Paths Extract application_id and document_type . Call 

‘get_document_paths(...)‘ ; stop and report if retrieval fails. 

Step 2 — Prepare Audit Context Initialize the fixed-key output skeleton and extract document representations: 

extract_table_structure ( image_path ) read_document_image ( image_path ) 

Check 1 — Field Presence Call ‘extract_document_fields(..., doc_type="paystub")‘ ,then read image and OCR. 

Field extraction rules (evolved): 

• ytd_regular_pay : YTD on the first/primary earnings line 

(“Regular”). Do NOT use the YTD Gross Earnings total. • EI zero vs. absent: printed zero → "0" ; absent → "" .. . . 

Check 2 — Arithmetic Consistency 

Sub-check A (evolved): stated MUST be read from the printed Regular/Base Pay line. Do NOT compute rate ×hours for stated ;that goes in calculation only. 

Salary skip (evolved): If rate is periodic (“Weekly”, “Monthly”, “Salary”) or operands missing: calculation: "" , equal: null —but still record stated from the printed line. 

Sub-checks B & C (evolved): Try different subsets of earnings lines before flagging a gross-pay mismatch. 

Sub-checks D to G (evolved): Confirm the labeled total is 

explicitly printed . If absent: calculation: "" , stated: "" ,

equal: null . Never infer stated .. . . 

Output 

Fixed-schema JSON, one keyed section per check: 

{" expected_fields ": {...} , " current_base_pay ": {...} , ... , " ei ": {...} }

A.2.2 Tax Slip Audit Skill 

Below we show the initial skill and its evolved suc-cessor for tax slip auditing. Unlike the paystub skill, whose checks are largely arithmetic (recom-puting a stated total from its components), a tax slip follows a fixed layout and its policy is rela-tively structural: the checks turn on whether spe-cific fields are present or absent rather than on nu-meric comparison. The evolved skill adds a single-pass efficiency requirement and normalization rules targeting field-extraction failures: monetary value normalization, employer name extraction, stan-dardized address formatting, and a strengthened exemption-conditional box logic grounded solely in the checkbox status. 

SKILL.md — initial 

name tax-slip-audit-initial 

description Verify a tax slip for fraud indicators. Triggers on “verify tax slip”, “check tax slip”, or when a tax slip needs fraud review. 

Tax Slip Audit 

This skill identifies document inconsistencies, missing information, structural anomalies, and compliance issues. 

Inputs 

• application_id 

• document_type = "tax_slip" 

• documents (images + OCR results) 

Step 1 — Parse Query and Resolve Paths Extract application_id and document_type . Call 

‘get_document_paths(...)‘ ; stop and report if retrieval fails. 

Step 2 — Prepare Audit Context Initialize the fixed-key output skeleton and extract document representations: 

extract_document_fields ( image_path , doc_type =" tax_slip ") read_document_image ( image_path ) 

Check 1 — Required Fields Every legitimate tax slip must contain: tax year, employer identity, employment income, and income tax deducted. Call 

‘extract_document_fields(...)‘ ; store each result as {valid, value} .

Check 2 — Exemption Consistency Tax slips carry three exemption checkboxes. When an exemption is active the corresponding deduction box must be absent or zero. 

11 Call ‘extract_exemption_status(image_path)‘ ; flag any box that carries a value despite the exemption being checked. . . . 

Check N — Rounding Pattern Payroll systems generate values with cents; all-whole-dollar amounts may indicate manual entry. Call 

‘check_rounding(monetary_values)‘ .

Output 

Fixed-schema JSON, one keyed section per check: 

{" expected_fields ": {...} , " exemption_expected_fields ": {...} , ... , " box_14 ": {...} , " rounding ": {...} }

SKILL.md — evolved 

name tax-slip-audit-evolved 

description Verify a tax slip for fraud signals using image and OCR data. Triggers on: “check tax slip”, “verify tax slip”, “tax slip fraud”, or any tax slip fraud-detection request. 

Tax Slip Audit 

Verify a tax slip for fraud signals and compliance. Work through the checks in order. 

Inputs 

• application_id 

• document_type = "tax_slip" 

• documents (images + OCR results) 

Step 1 — Parse Query and Resolve Paths Extract application_id and document_type . Call 

‘get_document_paths(...)‘ ; stop and report if retrieval fails. 

Step 2 — Prepare Audit Context Initialize the fixed-key output skeleton and extract document representations: 

extract_document_fields ( image_path , doc_type =" tax_slip ") read_document_image ( image_path ) 

Single-pass requirement (evolved): All checks MUST complete in a single pass. Reuse extract_document_fields results across checks; do not re-read the image unnecessarily. 

Check 1 — Required Fields Use ‘extract_document_fields(image_path, doc_type="tax_slip")‘ .

Monetary value normalization (evolved): Apply to every monetary value: (1) strip thousands-separator commas (“91,999.96” 

→ “91999.96”); (2) if OCR returns a whole number but image shows decimal cents, use the image value. 

Employer name extraction (evolved): Record organization name only. Strip from the first street number onward: “Acme Corp, 123 Main St” → “Acme Corp”. 

Employee address format (evolved): street, city, province, postal-code . Province as printed; postal code with one internal space; no country code. . . . 

Check 2 — Exemption-Conditional Boxes Use ‘extract_exemption_status(image_path)‘ ; reuse Check 1 results for box amounts. 

Exemption box logic (evolved): Validity of each conditional deduction box is determined solely by whether the corresponding exemption checkbox is checked. Do not infer exemption from income amount or employment type. . . . 

Output 

Fixed-schema JSON, one keyed section per check: 

{" expected_fields ": {...} , " exemption_expected_fields ": {...} , ... , " box_14 ": {...} , " rounding ": {...} }

A.3 Tools for FinDAS Agents 

The policy agents call into a fixed FinDAS toolkit (fifteen tools) organized into four functional groups. The groups are described at a high level to convey the toolkit’s role concisely, rather than reproducing each tool’s full signature and implementation. • Path resolution and I/O: locate an application’s document files (image, OCR) and persist each checkpoint write to the output file. • Document understanding: parse raw document images into structured representations, using tools such as extracting nested table layouts into HTML format for numeric reads, resolving field values into JSON key-value pairs, and detecting discrete binary states (e.g., checkbox fields) via a fine-tuned vision model. • Arithmetic checks: recompute a stated total from its components and report whether the two are consistent, skipping gracefully when an operand is missing or non-numeric. • Statutory and structural checks: rule-based functions enforce hard compliance constraints, including deduction ceiling checks, field-value digit limits, and pattern-based anomaly detec-tion, producing deterministic valid/invalid ver-dicts. By delegating such decisions to spe-cialized tools instead of the LLM, the system reduces the likelihood of hallucinated compli-ance judgments and ensures that decisions are grounded in explicit, auditable validation crite-ria. 

A.4 FRAMES Module Prompts 

Below we present the system prompt and user-message template for each FRAMES module, cov-ering both the cold start (§3.2) and the evolu-tion loop (§3.3–§3.4); placeholders are written as 

{variable} .

A.4.1 Policy-to-Skill Splitter and Rewriter 

The first cold-start module (§3.2, “Skill genera-tion”): it consumes the policy corpus Π and pro-duces the initial skill bank S = {s1, . . . , s L}. It runs as two passes. Pass 1 (Segmenter) splits each 12 policy document along procedural boundaries— one verifiable business activity per segment, de-fined as one complete audit workflow for one doc-ument type (paystub, tax slip, bank statement); in-dividual checks within that workflow are ordered steps inside the same segment, not separate seg-ments. Pass 2 (Skill Rewriter) rewrites each seg-ment into a self-contained SKILL.md skill sl with a description dl and a back-link to its authoritative clauses in Π. The two-pass split keeps each LLM call within one audit workflow’s scope, which is what makes the resulting SKILL.md self-contained and the segment boundaries auditable. 

System prompt — Segmenter (Pass 1) 

You are a policy segmenter agent. You receive ONE policy docu-ment and split it along procedural boundaries into segments, where each segment corresponds to one self-contained unit of verifiable work. 

What a “verifiable business activity” (one segment / one skill) is. Define the segment boundary by the natural unit of verifiable work in your domain — typically the artifact / entity / document type that a single end-to-end procedure operates on. Each self-contained procedure corresponds to one such unit. A segment is the COMPLETE procedure for one unit: it bundles every individual step or check that the procedure performs into one ordered whole. Do NOT treat an individual step as its own segment, and do NOT merge two distinct procedures into one segment. Decision rule: if the material is handled as one unit of verifiable work, it is exactly one segment. 

Boundary rules. 

• Never split one procedure across two segments; never merge two distinct procedures into one. • A segment may span multiple sections of the document; record every section id it covers (across all of its steps). • List the individual steps the procedure contains inside the segment summary so the rewrite pass knows which ordered steps to author. • Preserve the document’s own ordering; segments are emitted in reading order. 

Output schema (JSON only). 

• doc_id : the id of the input document. • segments : ordered array; each item is { segment_id :“{doc_id} -{n} ” ( {n} starts at 1, reading order), activity :one short noun phrase naming the single procedure, 

included_section_ids : non-empty array of section identifiers from THIS document that the segment covers (used as the policy back-link), summary : 1–2 sentences describing what the procedure does and its outcome }. 

Output rules. JSON only, no prose outside the JSON. segments 

must be non-empty. 

User message — Segmenter (Pass 1) 

Policy document 

doc_id: {doc_id} {policy_document_text} 

Task 

Split this document into procedural-boundary segments per your instructions. Return JSON only. 

System prompt — Skill Rewriter (Pass 2) 

You are a skill author. You receive ONE policy segment and the catalog of tools the procedure may call. You rewrite the segment into a self-contained, executable SKILL.md procedure. The whole workflow is ONE skill. 

Author the SKILL.md content body with ALL of these sections, in order. 

• name : name the skill. • description : one sentence stating what the skill audits (inconsistencies, missing fields, calculation anomalies, compliance). • Inputs : the fields the procedure consumes, one per line (default is application_id , document_type = “<type>” ,

documents (images + OCR results); if the skill needs more inputs to operate, add them here and prepare them in the setup steps below). • Setup steps (Step 1 — Parse Query and Resolve Paths; Step 2 — Prepare Audit Context; and Step N for any additional input setup): resolve the document paths, resolve any extra inputs the skill needs to operate, and load the document representations the checks read from, before any check runs; stop and report if path resolution fails. • One Check <n> — <name> per check, in reading order. Each check states (a) the fraud/consistency rule it enforces, grounded in a specific included section; (b) the tool call(s) it makes, by exact name; (c) how it records its result (e.g. as { valid , value }); and (d) any skip condition (e.g. a missing or non-numeric operand). • Output : a fixed-schema JSON block with exactly one keyed section per check, in the same order as the checks. 

Grounding and auditability requirements. 

• Every check must trace to a specific section in the loaded segment source text. Do not invent rules that are not in the segment. • Values, choices, and claims the procedure emits must be grounded in the document, a tool result, or a deterministically-derived source — never fabricated. • Record the authoritative section ids as the skill’s policy back-link so any agent action is traceable to source policy. 

Tool usage. Call ONLY tools from the tool catalog provided in the user message; reference each by its exact name and never invent a tool, path, or signature. 

Output schema (JSON only). 

• name : skill_id .• description : the frontmatter trigger line (“Verify a paystub for . . . . Triggers on . . . ”). This is the ONLY field retrieval scores against, so write concrete trigger phrases, not prose. • content : the full SKILL.md markdown body with all required sections in order (name, description, Inputs, setup steps, ordered checks, Output). 

Output rules. JSON only. Keep the skill self-contained and runnable. Do not add rules the segment does not contain, and do not call tools absent from the catalog. 

User message — Skill Rewriter (Pass 2) 

Policy segment (rewrite this into one skill) 

segment_id: {segment_id} 

activity: {activity} 

summary: {summary} 

loaded source text (the full text of every included section): 

{segment_source_text} 

Available tools (call ONLY these; reference each by its exact name) 

{available_tools} 

Task 

Rewrite this segment into one self-contained SKILL.md procedure per your instructions. Return JSON only. 

13 A.4.2 Baseline Coverage-Gap Surfacer 

The second cold-start module (§3.2, “Feedback triage and bootstrap”). It compares the policy cor-pus against the current skill bank and emits one base feedback record per uncovered clause; these records are then refined into structured cases by the converter in §A.4.4. 

System prompt — Baseline Coverage-Gap Sur-facer 

You are a baseline coverage-gap surfacer of a skill-evolution system. You receive the enterprise policy corpus (as clauses) and the current skill bank (each skill’s id, description, and body). Your job is to find policy clauses whose expected behavior is NOT yet exercised by any skill, and emit ONE feedback record per uncovered clause. 

What to emit per uncovered clause. 

• clause : the uncovered clause cited from the policy corpus. • feedback : a natural-language description of the expected behavior the clause requires and why the current skill bank leaves it unexercised. This is the raw diagnostic seed the converter will expand into the diagnostic record. Do NOT write a rubric, scenario, task, or expected_output — those are the converter’s job. 

Grounding requirement. The feedback text must trace to the clause: describe only behavior the clause states. Do not invent requirements the clause does not express. 

Output schema (JSON only). feedback_records : array; each item is { clause : string, feedback : string}. 

Output rules. JSON only, no prose outside the JSON. One base feedback record per uncovered clause. If no uncovered clause exists, emit feedback_records: [] .

User message — Baseline Coverage-Gap Surfacer 

Policy corpus (clauses) 

{policy} 

Current skill bank 

{skill_bank} 

Task 

Identify clauses whose expected behavior is not yet exercised by the skill bank, and emit one base feedback record per uncovered clause per your instructions. Return JSON only. 

A.4.3 Feedback Executability Classifier and Experiential Knowledge Classifier prompt. The executability classifier is a one-time cold-start module (§3.2) that splits a raw feedback backlog into executable items (forwarded to the converter in §A.4.4) and experiential items (appended to K). 

System prompt — Feedback Executability Classi-fier 

You are a feedback executability classifier. You receive a backlog of raw operational feedback items and the current skill bank (each skill’s id and description). Your job is to label each item by EXECUTABILITY. 

The executability test. Ask: could a fresh agent be handed a self-contained scenario derived from this item, run it end-to-end, and be scored pass/fail against a deterministic rubric? • YES → label "executable" . The item names a concrete, reproducible behavior or failure on a specific case/docu-ment/scenario. • NO → label "experiential" . The item is general advice, a heuristic, a preference, or a lesson with no replayable 

setup. It cannot be turned into a scored case, but it is useful as supplementary skill context. 

Match experiential item with skill. For "experiential" items: pick the single most relevant skill_id to attach the advice to, by matching the advice against skill descriptions. If nothing is a good match, set target_skill_id to null .

Output schema (JSON only). 

• items : array; each item is { item_index : the input item’s index, label : "experiential" | "executable" ,

rationale : one short sentence justifying the label via the executability test, target_skill_id : skill_id to attach 

K to (when label = "experiential" ), else null }. 

Output rules. JSON only, no prose outside the JSON. Every input item must appear exactly once. 

User message — Feedback Executability Classifier 

Skill bank (id + description) 

{skill_descriptions} 

Raw operational feedback backlog 

{numbered_raw_feedback_items} 

Task 

Label each feedback item by executability and map each 

"experiential" item to its most relevant skill. Return JSON only. 

Experiential knowledge lifecycle. Items classi-fied as "experiential" are stored in a dedicated knowledge library keyed by skill_id . When a skill is loaded at inference time, its correspond-ing K entries are injected into the agent’s context alongside the skill body; if the skill is not loaded, its K is absent from context. K is append-only and is never subject to the automatic evolution loop, which treats it as read-only context—this prevents unvalidated content from being mutated by the loop or from silently altering scored behavior. In its current form, K constitutes a small fraction of feedback ( ∼3% ) and is mostly side guidance, so items are simply appended without further process-ing. As a skill’s K grows, a conflict-resolver or summarizer could be added to reconcile contradic-tory entries, surface the latest guidance, and cap per-skill length. 

K does not affect the reported experimental re-sults. The evolution loop is driven and scored en-tirely by the structured cases (mi, t i); K carries no rubric and is never scored. Given its small vol-ume and read-only role, it did not materially enter the evaluated skill sets—it is a deployment conve-nience for preserving human advice that cannot be turned into a test, rather than a contributor to the measured accuracy–cost numbers. 

A.4.4 Feedback-to-Case Converter (Human Review Channel) 

The converter for the human review channel (§3.2, “Continuous feedback ingestion”), which refines each groundable reviewer artifact into one struc-14 tured case fi = ( mi, t i) of the form illustrated in §A.5.2. The converters for the other two channels (automated trajectory analysis and policy updates) follow the same schema, differing only in the input artifacts they parse; we omit their prompts here for space. 

System prompt — Feedback-to-Case Converter (Human Review) 

You are the converter in a skill-evolution system. You receive raw operational-feedback artifacts and refine each groundable artifact into ONE structured evaluation case. 

How to build the case. 

• diagnostic_record : natural-language description of the failure mode (or the newly required behavior). • evaluation_task : an executable scenario the agent can run: 

– category : one of general , hallucination ,

special . hallucination — an ungrounded / fabri-cated value; special — a goal the agent escalated, refused, or halted on instead of reaching via an in-policy path, or an edge case not covered by policy; general — a largely-correct case with a minor correction. 

– description : the user-facing task statement, reusing the artifact’s application_id where one exists. 

– task : { task_id , evaluation_criteria } — the rubric must encode the corrected / amended behavior precisely enough to score a fresh agent run pass/fail. 

– expected_output : the ground truth; if the exact key and value are not provided by the raw feedback, return null .

Grounding requirement. Every rubric criterion and 

expected_output value must trace to the artifact. Do not in-vent requirements the artifact does not state. If an artifact’s ground truth cannot be reconstructed, SKIP it — do not guess. 

Output schema (JSON only). 

• cases : array; each item is { diagnostic_record : string, 

evaluation_task : { category , description , task : { 

task_id , evaluation_criteria }, expected_output } }. • skipped : array of { feedback_id : reason } for artifacts that are not groundable into a scorable case. 

Output rules. JSON only, no prose outside the JSON. Emit at most one case per artifact. 

User message — Feedback-to-Case Converter (Hu-man Review) 

Operational-feedback artifacts 

{numbered_feedback_artifacts} 

Task 

Refine each artifact into a structured case, or skip it if it is not groundable into a scorable rubric. Return JSON only. 

A.4.5 Diagnoser (per Feedback Batch) 

System prompt — Diagnoser 

You are one of N parallel diagnoser agents in an evolution loop. You will receive a parent skill program (a set of skills) and a batch of feedback items (failed and/or passed cases executed against that program). 

Your job. (1) Extract generalizable success patterns from passing baseline items ( general ); these are what the program already gets right and must be preserved. (2) Analyze the dominant root cause(s) across the failing items ( special and hallucination ). (3) Propose one short paragraph of edit plan per skill that should 

be edited to fix those root causes without breaking the success patterns. 

Inputs. Parent Program: a list of skills’ main content (SKILL.md), each with skill_id , description , and full markdown body. 

Feedback Batch: a numbered list with category , description ,

evaluation (per-check outcomes: db_check , action_checks ,

communicate_checks , and static_json verdict with field-level mismatches), optional incomplete flag (set when the agent hit 

max_steps ), and annotation for non-general items. 

Output schema (enforced by JSON schema). 

• categories : subset of { special , hallucination } ad-dressed by the proposed edit. • root_cause : short paragraph identifying the dominant failure pattern, grounded in failing items and contrasted against general success patterns. • plans : object mapping each target skill_id to one short paragraph describing what sections to add, change, or remove, and why. Keys must be a subset of the parent’s 

skill_id s. 

Per-category guidance. 

• special — the agent escalated, refused, or halted (including running out of step budget) before reaching the user’s underlying goal through the in-policy paths available. Push the SKILL.md toward completing the user’s goal through in-policy paths: restate the goal in policy terms, enumerate every in-policy branch that could advance it, attempt those options in policy-prescribed order, prefer batch tool forms over repeating the single-item form, escalate or refuse only the residual portion that has no in-policy path. • hallucination — the agent’s actions or outputs diverge from what the user, policy, or available sources actually specified. Push the SKILL.md toward grounding behavior in explicit, traceable sources before acting or replying: every value, choice, and claim should trace to a specific user utterance, policy clause, or deterministically-derived source; user-given values should override policy defaults when policy permits; qualitative or referential expressions should be resolved into concrete values; when grounding is missing, ask or verify rather than fill the gap. • general — standard routine cases that are primarily correct, with only minor errors. The errors still warrant repair, but correct ones supply success patterns to preserve: extract what the SKILL.md already gets right and ensure the edits proposed for the other categories do not regress this behavior. 

Targets. An edit plan can target either the SKILL.md prose (add a fallback/retry loop, verification checkpoint, edge-case rule, workflow step) or a bundled script the skill invokes (fix a bug, add error handling, harden a network call) referenced by its existing path. 

Output rules. plans must be non-empty (an empty object is rejected); be concise but specific; do not output reasoning outside the JSON. 

User message — Diagnoser 

Parent Program 

{rendered_parent_skills} 

Feedback Batch 

{rendered_feedback_batch} 

Task 

Produce ONE proposal in the schema above. JSON only. 

A.4.6 Consolidator 

System prompt — Consolidator 

You are a consolidator agent in an evolution loop. You receive 

N peer-reviewed proposals from parallel diagnoser agents who each analyzed a different feedback batch from the same parent skill program. A consolidation strategy has already filtered the proposals down to a “surviving” set you must synthesize over. 

Your job. Produce ONE consolidated edit plan per surviving 

skill_id that captures the agents’ consensus while dropping idiosyncratic / one-off suggestions. 

15 Inputs. surviving_skill_ids (the exact set of skills you must produce plans for); per agent: root_cause and plans entries restricted to surviving skills. 

Output schema. 

• categories : non-empty subset of { special ,

hallucination , general }, reflecting the union addressed across the agents. • root_cause : a concise paragraph summarizing the dom-inant failure pattern the agents agree on; no idiosyncratic claims. • plans : object whose keys equal surviving_skill_ids 

(no extras, no omissions); each value is one focused paragraph that merges concrete suggestions from multiple agents (preserving tool names, file paths, conditional logic), drops one-off / contradictory suggestions, and is self-contained enough that a downstream LLM can rewrite the SKILL.md from this paragraph alone. 

Output rules. JSON only, no prose outside the JSON. 

User message — Consolidator 

Surviving skill_ids 

{surviving_skill_ids_json_array} 

Agents’ proposals (restricted to surviving skills) 

{rendered_proposals_filtered} 

Task 

Synthesize a single consolidated proposal. JSON only. 

A.4.7 Skill Builder (Rewriter) 

The skill-rewriting stage (§3.4), applied to one tar-get skill at a time. Sibling skills are passed as context-only (frontmatter description only, not full bodies) so the rewriter knows what other skills are responsible for and avoids duplication. Aux-iliary files in the skill folder are listed by relative path so the rewriter can reference them without inventing paths. 

System prompt — Skill Builder 

You are a skill rewriter in an evolution loop. Skills are STRUC-TURED PROCEDURES, not free text. They typically contain if-then branching for input variants, explicit tool calls (e.g. 

table_to_html , find_evidence , verify_claim ), multi-step pipelines with intermediate checks, and verification / grounding steps before final output. 

Inputs. The target skill (frontmatter + full markdown body — rewrite this); sibling skills in the parent program (context only, do not edit them); a consolidated edit plan describing the change to apply. 

Auxiliary files. Aux files ( scripts/ , references/ , agents/ ,

assets/ ) live alongside SKILL.md on disk and are copied to the new skill folder unchanged. You may reference them in the rewritten content using their existing relative paths; do not invent paths that do not exist in the parent. 

Versioning. The skill is being versioned. If the parent’s markdown body references the parent_skill_id anywhere (H1 title, sec-tion headings, self-references), replace those occurrences with 

new_skill_id .

How to edit. Apply the edit plan precisely. Preserve the skill’s overall structure (section headings, ordering, existing tool calls) unless the plan explicitly says otherwise. Keep the skill self-contained and runnable. 

Output. Return ONE JSON object with: description (the trigger / when-to-use line for the frontmatter) and content (the full updated markdown body). No YAML frontmatter, no outer code fences, no commentary or reasoning text outside the JSON. 

User message — Skill Builder 

Target skill (rewrite this) 

{rendered_target_skill} 

Versioning 

parent_skill_id: {parent_skill_id} 

new_skill_id: {new_skill_id} 

Replace any occurrence of {parent_skill_id} in the body (H1 title, headings, self-references) with {new_skill_id} .

Auxiliary files in target skill folder (do not invent new paths) 

{aux_file_list} 

Sibling skills (context only) 

{sibling_skill_descriptions} 

Consolidated edit plan (for {target_skill_id} )

categories: {categories} 

root_cause: {root_cause} 

plan: {plan_for_target} 

Task 

Rewrite the target skill to fully apply the edit plan above. Respond with JSON only. 

A.5 From Operation Feedback to Structured Cases A.5.1 Raw Feedback Corpus Samples 

These samples are drawn from the operational feed-back that FinDAS accumulates as its policy agents execute skills on real cases. As described in §3.2, feedback enters through three channels — human review, automated trajectory analysis, and policy-update diffs — and each is converted into a diagnos-tic record that states the failure mode in free-form natural language. Below we show representative records from each category. 

Special 

• When an exemption box is checked, the corre-sponding value should be either blank or zero. • When no YTD Net Pay line appeared on the doc-ument, the agent attempted to derive the figure from other fields rather than treating the absence as a skip condition — if the relevant printed line does not exist, the check should be omitted en-tirely. 

Hallucination 

• The stated base pay was computed as rate ×

hours rather than read from the printed Reg-ular/Base Pay line. Even when rate or hours are absent, the printed line value should still be recorded; only the arithmetic cross-check is skipped. • The stated value for total deductions was re-summed from individual line items rather than read from the printed “Total Deductions” line. On documents that separate Taxes from Payroll Deductions into distinct subtotals, the relevant figure is the Payroll Deductions subtotal, not the combined amount. 16 • Gross pay was flagged as a mismatch after try-ing only one combination of earnings lines. Dif-ferent documents include different subsets of earnings components; all plausible combinations should be explored before flagging a discrep-ancy. 

General 

• Monetary values containing thousands-separator commas (e.g., "90,169.00" ) were not normal-ized — the comma should be stripped before any numerical comparison. • The employee address included a country suffix (e.g., “CAN”) that should be omitted, and the postal code was missing the required internal space (e.g., "M5V 2T6" , not "M5V2T6" ). 

A.5.2 Structured Case Example 

Below we show a single structured case fi =(mi, t i) converted from human review notes drawn from the FinDAS. Here mi is the natural-language diagnostic record identifying the failure mode, and 

ti is the executable evaluation task. 

Structured case fi           

> mi= “The base pay stated value must be read directly from the printed Regular/Base Pay line. The formula rate ×hours serves only as a cross-check and must not substitute the printed value. When rate or hours are absent, the check is skipped but the printed value is still recorded. YTD net pay must likewise come from the printed YTD Net Pay line; if absent, the field is left blank.”
> ti= {
> "category": “hallucination”,
> "description": “Verify application {ID} ’s paystub documents for potential fraud . . . ”,
> "task": {
> "task_id": 2,
> "evaluation_criteria": {. . .
> // criteria by which task success is determined
> }},
> "expected_output": {. . .
> // ground-truth output the agent must produce to earn reward
> }}

A.6 Experiment Setting Operating-point selection. Because FinDAS op-erates in a high-stakes financial setting, a wrong verdict carries far greater downstream cost than a few extra tokens; we therefore prioritize accu-racy ( PR ) over inference cost when selecting P∗

in experiments, breaking ties toward lower cost (Ta-ble 3). A live deployment may instead pick any frontier point to match its risk and budget (§3.6). The baselines carry no such setting. B1-B3 perform no evolution, B4 runs a single evolve step with one output, and B5 emits the final skill set of its own mechanism. Table 3 reports the default FRAMES configura-tion used throughout the experiments, except where an ablation in §4.3 varies a single knob. 

A.7 Experiment Discussion A.7.1 Data Sources and Sampling Design 

Evaluating what FRAMES targets requires more than a set of scored tasks: a governing policy the skills are derived from and traced back to, multi-step tool-using execution scored on the final verdict, a record of how a deployed agent actually failed, independent of the method under test, and enough cases twice over—one set for the loop to evolve from, and a disjoint held-out set, large enough per risk category, to validate what it produces. No pub-lic resource we are aware of provides all these to-gether, which is what makes an internal system nec-essary here rather than preferred. Document-QA benchmarks supply tasks as document–question pairs but no governed workflow to execute, and no ground truth over an agent’s actions to score that execution against (§4.1). Policy-governed agent benchmarks supply the policy and the workflow— enough for FRAMES to cold-start— but their cases carry gold answers rather than failure histories, and a method scored on signal it synthesized for itself cannot demonstrate that real corrections general-ize into reusable rules. Among the latter, τ -bench is the closest match and the harness we build on (§A.8); its domains probe generality rather than substituting for FinDAS, their pools ( 110 and 50 

cases) being thin once split into an evolution set and a per-category held-out set. FinDAS supplies the missing combination: 78 policy documents across 

23 document types (§A.2), reviewer feedback ac-cumulated from real audits, and a case pool deep enough to fill three equal categories twice over at the size used below. The evolution set and the held-out test set are both drawn from the FinDAS case pool and strat-ified into equal category cells ( 70 general, 70 hal-lucination, 70 special each) rather than sampled at operational incidence, under which hallucination-type risk dominates. Each case carries the category its converter assigns from the reviewer’s annota-tion (§A.4.4), verified by a domain expert. The balance is a measurement choice: the reported unit is the per-category pass rate PR c and the gate holds a floor in each category independently (§3.5), so 17 Parameter Default value 

Models 

Diagnoser, Consolidator, Skill Builder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Claude Sonnet 4.6 (thinking enabled) Cold-start Segmenter, Rewriter, Surfacer, Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Claude Sonnet 4.6 (thinking enabled) Embedder (cold-start retrieval) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Titan Embed Text v2 Policy agent (FinDAS evaluation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Claude Sonnet 4.6 (thinking enabled) Policy agent & user simulator ( τ -bench evaluation) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Claude Sonnet 4.5 (thinking enabled) 

Evolution loop 

Top-k . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5

Diagnoser batch size |B i| . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8 (N =⌈|F| /8⌉ parallel diagnosers) Max iterations T . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10 

Convergence patience τ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 3 iterations without improvement Maximum frontier size |frontier | . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . ≤ 3 (Pareto non-dominated set) 

P∗ Selection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . arg max P∈ frontier (PR , −Cost) (accuracy-first) Consolidation strategy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . section (default); options: section , cluster , none 

Voting threshold . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 40% of diagnosers Regression tolerance ϵ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5% (relative, per category) Regression pool sample per iteration . . . . . . . . . . . . . sized in proportion (50%) to the task size in the current evolution round Batch shuffle seed . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . per-iter = base + iter (base = 0 )

Table 3: Default configuration of FRAMES in the §4 

unequal cells would estimate the categories at dif-ferent resolutions and let the most frequent one carry the total. With equal cells one case moves a category rate by 1/70 ≈ 0.014 and the total by 

≈0.005 , so the differences we report are not single-case artifacts. The cell size stops at 70 because each case is a full multi-trial agent run and the evo-lution set is re-scored for every candidate at every iteration, making evaluation—not sampling—the binding cost (see Limitations). The two sets are disjoint and the held-out set takes no part in the loop: diagnosis, the non-regression gate, and the frontier selection of P∗ all read the evolution set and the regression pool only, and the held-out set is scored once per method in experiments. 

A.7.2 Significance and Structure of the Improvement 

FRAMES leads the strongest baseline B5 in ev-ery category (Table 1) and on total at every k (Fig-ure 3), and its widest margin falls on hallucination— the dominant safety risk in this financial setting— where it also attains its highest absolute pass rate. In Table 1 the interval for FRAMES ( [.74 , . 85] )overlaps that of the strongest baseline B5 

([.65 , . 77] ). These intervals are marginal—each computed for one method on its own—so their overlap does not imply that the difference between the two is zero, and we test that difference directly. The comparison here is paired: both methods are scored on the same 210 held-out cases, and with 

n=k=3 each case yields a binary pass@ 3, so the two runs can be compared case by case. Pairing is what makes the test sharp. Of the 210 cases, 

173 resolve identically under both methods, leav-ing 37 discordant cases to carry the signal; varia-tion in case difficulty moves both methods together and cancels in the difference. We test H0, that the two methods have equal pass@ 3 on the test distribution, against H1, that they differ. The ob-served gap is ∆=+0 .090 (0.800 vs. 0.710 , or 19 

additional cases passed), and a paired bootstrap over cases ( B=10 ,000 ) puts its 95% interval at 

[+0 .038 , +0 .148] , which excludes zero. McNe-mar’s exact test reaches the same verdict from the discordant cases alone: 28 of them are won by FRAMES and 9 by B5 , whereas under H0 each should fall either way with equal probability, and a split this lopsided or more has two-sided proba-bility p=0 .0026 . We therefore reject H0 at the 5% 

level: the lead over the strongest baseline is not attributable to sampling. It is also not an artifact of the reported k—the paired interval excludes zero at k=1 , 2, and 3 (∆=+0 .144 , +0 .111 , +0 .090 )— nor specific to B5 : against B4 , the next strongest baseline, the margin is larger and the evidence stronger ( ∆=+0 .143 , two-sided p=2 .8 × 10 −6). That the lead is broad rather than concentrated is what the per-category gate produces (§3.5). Be-cause B5 is itself an evolved skill bank from the 18 same seed S, feedback F, and policy agent, this margin measures what FRAMES adds over a prior skill-evolution method rather than whether skill evolution helps at all; Table 2 separates the indi-vidual contributions of frontier search, consensus filtering, and the gate. The gain carries no cost premium: FRAMES posts the lowest output cost of any method, at an input cost within the range spanned by the baselines. 

A.7.3 Robustness to Pipeline Stochasticity 

The sweep in Table 2 is built to isolate hyperparam-eters, but it doubles as a repeated-run study. Every stage of the loop is stochastic (diagnosis, consoli-dation, skill rewriting, and the agent runs that score each candidate), so each row is an independent end-to-end execution that re-rolls all of it. Each also runs under a handicap: a configuration deliberately moved off the default, and a smaller evolution set, so sparser signal to improve skills from. Although none of these settings matches the default, their to-tals average pass@ k—outside the two intermediate batch sizes—stay close to one another and match or exceed that of the strongest baseline, which was evolved on the full set. That exception is the sen-sitivity S1 characterizes, not a random excursion: outside it, quality holds under both configuration and execution randomness. 

A.7.4 Cost Stability and Deployment Overhead 

Read as repeated runs (§A.7.3), the same sweep settles what the reported costs are worth. Cost is reported in tokens throughout: billing is a fixed rate per token and output tokens are generated one at a time, so monetary cost is linear in the counts below, and per-call latency close to linear in the output count. 

Inference cost. This is paid on every case for as long as the skills are deployed. Across the ten runs it holds a narrow band— 3.90 –4.52 k output tokens per case, and 343 –383 k input apart from the two extreme batch sizes, which move input to 402 kat |B i|=1 and 453 k at 40 : at either extreme the edits come out unusually fine-grained or unusually broad, and both leave the agent extra work to apply (§4.3). B5 spends 6.48 k output tokens per case, above every run in that band, so its gap to FRAMES is wider than the spread our own runs produce. 

Evolution cost. This is paid once when the skill bank is built, and does not recur on the cases the deployed agent serves. Holding batch size at its default, the six runs that vary selection, consen-sus, and tolerance spend 78 –83 k input and 21 –25 koutput tokens per iteration. Batch size is the one setting that moves this figure—from 379 k input per iteration at |B i|=1 down to 36 k at 40 — but the set-ting cheapest to evolve is also the most expensive to serve (§4.3). The default takes the other side of that trade: evolution is paid once, inference on every case thereafter. 

A.8 τ -bench Experiment 

Beyond the internal FinDAS domain, FRAMES is evaluated on two public domains of τ -bench (Yao et al., 2025), keeping τ -bench’s original cases, tool APIs, and environment configuration unchanged, with FRAMES run under the same default settings as the FinDAS experiments (§4.1, shown in Ta-ble 3). In each domain, the τ -bench policy is con-verted into skills to form the B2 (LLM skills) seed, from which B3 , B4 , B5 , and FRAMES all derive: 

B3 (Human skills) is the same seed after expert review and editing, while B4 , B5 , and FRAMES evolve it automatically. The policy agent and user simulator run on Claude Sonnet 4.5 with thinking enabled, and every case is manually classified into the three categories (general, hallucination, special) with matching feedback. Because τ -bench pro-vides few cases per domain, the evolution/test split is chosen per domain to keep both sides usable: the evolution set must cover all three categories with enough feedback for the loop to learn from, and the held-out set must remain large enough to give reliable per-category estimates. 

A.8.1 Retail Domain Setting. This domain provides 110 cases, which we manually classify by their outcome into 78 gen-eral, 15 hallucination, and 17 special. A 65 /35 

evolution/test split then leaves 70 cases for evolu-tion ( 49 general, 10 hallucination, 11 special) and a 40 -case held-out test set ( 29 general, 5 hallucina-tion, 6 special). 

Results. Table 4a reports average pass@ k on this held-out test set. The public τ -bench retail policy is compact and already well covered by the seed, so scores are high across the board and the headroom is small—a near-saturated regime that leaves little room to separate methods on accuracy alone. Even here, FRAMES comes out ahead: it ties for the best overall quality ( 0.98 ), is the only method to handle 19 Quality (average pass@ k) Inference Cost Method General ↑ Hallucination ↑ Special ↑ Total ↑ k tok / case ↓                              

> B1 Raw LLM 0.90 1.00 0.67 0.88 80.90 | 1.52 B2 LLM skills 0.97 0.80 0.83 0.93 112.03 | 2.93 B3 Human skills 0.97 0.80 1.00 0.95 155.55 | 3.01 B4 Batch update 0.97 1.00 1.00 0.98 123.59 | 2.88 B5 AutoSkill 0.97 1.00 0.83 0.95 109.16 | 2.69
> FRAMES (ours) 1.00 1.00 0.83 0.98 109.68 | 2.14

(a) Baseline comparison on the public τ -bench retail domain. Quality (average pass@ k) Inference Cost Method General ↑ Hallucination ↑ Special ↑ Total ↑ k tok / case ↓                              

> B1 Raw LLM 1.00 0.71 0.67 0.84 93.69 | 1.82 B2 LLM skills 1.00 0.71 0.83 0.88 129.74 | 3.51 B3 Human skills 0.92 0.71 0.67 0.80 180.15 | 3.61 B4 Batch update 1.00 0.86 0.67 0.80 143.13 | 3.45 B5 AutoSkill 1.00 0.86 0.83 0.92 126.42 | 3.23
> FRAMES (ours) 1.00 1.00 0.83 0.96 127.02 | 2.57

(b) Baseline comparison on the public τ -bench airline domain. 

Table 4: Baseline comparison on the public τ -bench domains (pass@ k, k=3 ; Claude Sonnet 4.5 agent). Total is the case-weighted average across categories; inference cost is in thousands of tokens ( k), input | output. 

the general category perfectly ( 1.00 ), and matches the best on hallucination ( 1.00 ); on special, where scores rest on few cases and move in coarse steps, it remains competitive ( 0.83 ). What sets FRAMES apart is reaching this at no cost penalty—among the skill-bearing methods, it posts the lowest cost and sits at the high-quality end of the cost–quality frontier, while the raw LLM (B1) is cheaper only by attaching no skill and is the weakest overall. The pattern echoes FinDAS—top-tier accuracy at no cost penalty—indicating the approach generalizes beyond our internal domain. 

A.8.2 Airline Domain Setting. Airline provides only 50 cases in to-tal—the smallest of our three domains—so we adopt an even 50 /50 evolution/test split rather than the 65 /35 used for retail. This keeps enough cases in every category on both sides for a meaningful per-category estimate. The 50 cases comprise 24 

general, 14 hallucination, and 12 special. The split yields 25 cases for evolution ( 12 general, 7 hallu-cination, 6 special) and a 25 -case held-out test set (12 general, 7 hallucination, 6 special). 

Results. Table 4b reports average pass@k on the held-out test set. FRAMES achieves the highest overall quality ( 0.96 ) among all methods. On the hallucination subset, which is the primary target of our approach, FRAMES attains 1.00 , whereas the strongest baseline reaches only 0.86 (B4 and 

B5 ). On general cases, FRAMES remains at the ceiling shared by the strongest automatic methods (1.00 ), while on special cases it achieves a compet-itive 0.83 . Because the Airline benchmark contains only 50 total cases, with 7 held-out hallucination cases and 6 held-out special cases, these category-level estimates are necessarily coarse and should be interpreted with appropriate caution. Neverthe-less, the qualitative pattern is consistent with both FinDAS and Retail: FRAMES remains among the highest-quality methods while avoiding any cost penalty. 

A.9 Supplementary Method Details A.9.1 Non-Regression Gate: Semantics and Scope 

The per-category admission gate (Eq. 2) serves as the primary mechanism for preventing regression during skill evolution. We detail its semantics be-low. 

What the gate enforces. Every candidate child 

P′ must satisfy PR c(P′) ≥ (1 − ϵ) PR c(P0) for all categories c, evaluated over the current evolu-tion set F plus a sampled subset of the regression pool Reval ⊂ R . The tolerance ϵ = 0 .05 absorbs stochastic evaluation noise (pass rates are estimated from k=3 independent trials per case) and encour-ages exploration of candidates that trade marginal accuracy in one category for gains elsewhere. If no candidate clears the gate in a given iteration, the baseline P0 is retained unchanged. 

Deterministic vs. probabilistic coverage. The gate provides a deterministic guard on the evalu-ated subset F ∪ Reval : every case in this set has been executed and scored, and the per-category floor is enforced exactly (up to ϵ). For the remainder of 

R not sampled in a given iteration, the protection is probabilistic —it relies on the cumulative cover-age achieved by repeated stratified sampling across iterations (quantified below). 

A.9.2 Regression-Pool Sampling Strategy Pool composition and per-iteration sample size. 

The regression pool R accumulates all previously resolved cases across the system’s lifetime. At each evolution iteration t, we draw a regression sample 

Reval sized at 50% of the current-round evaluation set (i.e., proportional to the task size rather than to 

|R| ). This keeps per-iteration evaluation cost stable and predictable as the pool grows. Sampling is stratified by category to ensure minority categories (e.g., special ) are never under-represented. 20 Sampling mechanics. The evaluation budget 

|Reval | is allocated in two layers. (i) Skill-targeted priority: cases associated with skills modified in the current iteration (identified via the same case-skill associations used for anchor-case retrieval; §3.4) are sampled first, directly testing whether the edit introduced a regression on its primary depen-dents. Cases already supplied as anchor constraints in the rewrite prompt are excluded from the sam-pling pool, so the gate never credits behavior the rewriter was explicitly conditioned on. (ii) Strat-ified random: the remaining budget is filled by category-stratified random sampling from the rest of R, covering potential side-effects where editing one skill indirectly affects cases governed by other skills. The split between the two layers is con-figurable per deployment. Within each iteration, sampling is without replacement; across iterations, sampling is independent, so the gate re-checks a different cross-section on each round and progres-sively builds cumulative coverage. 

A.9.3 Coverage Under Pool Growth 

A natural concern is that as R grows across the system’s lifetime, a fixed-size sample provides di-minishing per-case coverage. We show that, under mild assumptions, the two-layer sampling design (§A.9.2) maintains a high probability of detecting 

a regression—i.e., sampling at least one case that exhibits the failure—independent of pool size. 

Assumptions. A1 (Skill-level clustering.) We denote by 

skills( x) ⊆ S the set of skills associated with case x (the same association used for anchor-case retrieval; §3.4), and by Rj = {x ∈ R | 

sj ∈ skills( x)} the cases whose resolution de-pends on skill sj . If a rewrite to sj causes regression, at least a fraction α > 0 of cases in 

Rj will exhibit that regression. This is a rea-sonable expectation given that skills are shared procedural abstractions: cases resolved by the same skill share overlapping governing logic, so a regression-inducing edit typically mani-fests across a non-negligible subset rather than a single isolated case. 

A2 (Sub-linear skill bank growth.) The skill bank size |S| grows over time (as new policies are in-troduced or evolution creates new skills) but at a rate much lower than the pool: |S| = o(|R| ).This holds because each skill encodes a gen-eral paradigm for solving a class of problems and thus covers many cases, whereas the pool grows with every resolved feedback instance. 

A3 (Positive skill share.) For any actively main-tained skill sj , its pool fraction pj = |R j |/|R| 

remains bounded away from zero as |R| → ∞ ;formally, lim inf |R|→∞ pj > 0. This does not 

require uniform distribution across skills—it only requires that a skill in active use continues to accumulate resolved cases at a rate that keeps pace with overall pool growth. A2 ensures that the number of skills does not grow fast enough to dilute every skill’s share to zero. 

Primary defense: Targeted-layer detection. 

The skill-targeted layer (layer i in §A.9.2) sam-ples directly from Rj when skill sj is modified. Under A1, a fraction α of those cases exhibit the re-gression. If the targeted layer draws nt cases from 

Rj , the single-iteration detection probability is: 

ptargeted detect (sj ) = 1 − (1 − α)nt (4) where nt = min( |R(i)

> eval

|, |R j |) and |R(i)

> eval

| is the targeted-layer budget. Crucially, this expression contains neither |R| nor pj —it is inherently pool-independent .

Secondary defense: Random-layer detection. 

The stratified-random layer (layer ii) covers side-effects: when skill sk is edited, the targeted layer checks cases in Rk, but the edit may indirectly af-fect cases governed by a different skill sj (j̸ = k). Let β > 0 denote the fraction of cases in Rj that exhibit such a side-effect regression (analogous to A1 for indirect effects; typically β ≤ α since indirect effects are weaker). Drawing nr cases from R (modeled as uniform for a conservative lower bound; stratification only improves minority-category coverage), the probability of sampling at least one affected case from Rj is: 

prandom detect (sj ) = 1 − (1 − β p j )nr (5) 

Approximation note. Both Eq. 4 and Eq. 5 use the with-replacement (binomial) model. Since actual sampling is without replacement, the true detection probabilities are at least as high (nega-tive correlation only helps). The approximation is tight when the pool is much larger than the sample (|R j | ≫ nt for the targeted layer; |R| ≫ nr for the random layer), which holds in practice. 21 Pool-independence of detection. Neither Eq. 4 nor Eq. 5 contains |R| directly. The targeted layer depends only on α and nt; the random layer de-pends on β, pj , and nr. Under A3, pj remains bounded away from zero, so β p j does not vanish as the pool grows. Detection probability is there-fore stable regardless of pool scale. 

Contrast with naive per-case coverage. Under uniform random sampling without skill structure, the probability that a specific case is sampled at least once across T iterations is: 

pcase = 1 −



1 − |Reval ||R| 

T

, (6) which degrades as |R| grows. The skill-level anal-ysis avoids this degradation: detecting a regression on sj requires hitting any one of the α |R j | affected cases (targeted layer) or sampling any case whose regression probability is β p j per draw (random layer), rather than a specific individual case. 

Rate of degradation. The only scenario where detection degrades is if pj drifts toward zero for a skill still being edited. Under A2, the num-ber of skills grows sub-linearly, so the average share 1/|S| shrinks slowly; A3 further ensures that any actively maintained skill’s share stays positive. Thus any degradation is driven by the slow pace of skill-bank expansion—substantially slower than pool growth. For skills that become dormant (no new cases), pj may shrink, but dormant skills are not edited and therefore do not require regression detection. 

A.10 Positioning Relative to Concurrent Skill-Evolution Methods 

We provide a detailed comparison between FRAMES and the closest concurrent methods— GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2026), GRASP (Moll et al., 2026), and SAGE (Wang et al., 2026b)—to clarify the scope distinction raised in review. Table 5 sum-marizes the comparison; the text below elaborates. 

Scope distinction. The recently released skill/prompt-evolution methods share a narrower framing: given a fixed skill/prompt set and a fixed test set , evolve the artifact toward higher benchmark accuracy under a single scalar objective. FRAMES instead addresses the full lifecycle a reg-ulated production system demands: it cold-starts a multi-skill bank directly from business policy (no curated skill set or test set to begin with), treats policy as the governing compliance guide, and then improves the bank continuously from real, arriving production feedback—subject to a per-category no-regression gate, a cost–performance Pareto evolution objective, and a lifetime anti-regression memory. The deliverable is a menu of deployable, compliance-safe operating points that keeps improving over the system’s lifetime, not a single artifact tuned once against a frozen test set. 

GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2026). GEPA maintains an instance-level Pareto frontier for diversity in par-ent selection, optimizes a single scalar objective (accuracy), and returns one best-aggregate candi-date. It is a one-time optimization routine against a fixed development set: it does not address cold start from policy, continuous ingestion of produc-tion feedback, cost as a first-class objective, or lifetime anti-regression memory. 

GRASP (Moll et al., 2026). GRASP validates each skill edit against a held-out probe before com-mitting, iterating over a fixed development split for a bounded number of epochs. Its regression gate aggregates over all probe examples into one global decision; it does not enforce per-category floors. It is likewise a one-time optimization routine: no cold start from policy, no continuous feedback ingestion, no cost objective, no lifetime memory. 

SAGE (Wang et al., 2026b). SAGE trains model weights via Skill-Augmented GRPO. FRAMES deliberately restricts itself to a frozen model and an authored, human-readable skill bank—an auditable, roll-back-friendly path better suited to regulated deployment. 

Why these gaps matter in production. A global gate can mask compliance-critical regressions in minority categories; a one-time fit does not survive continuous policy updates and feedback ingestion; and a single operating point cannot serve work-loads with different risk–cost profiles. These are precisely the gaps FRAMES is built to close. 

Industrial context. The concurrent RELAI plat-form (Feizi, 2026) articulates closely aligned prin-ciples (replayable environments, lifelong improve-ment without forgetting, efficient token use) but to our knowledge has not published an algorithm, for-mal problem statement, or reproducible evaluation. We read it as independent evidence that continual, cost-aware agent improvement is an industrially im-portant problem—supporting our motivation rather 22 than serving as a baseline. 

On the survey (Xu and Yan, 2026). The survey organizes skill acquisition into multiple paradigms—reinforcement learning with skill li-braries (SAGE), autonomous discovery (SEAgent), and compositional synthesis—along with security and governance concerns, and flags skill selec-tion at scale (Challenge 2) and evaluation of skill reusability/maintainability (Challenge 7) as un-solved. FRAMES occupies a cell the survey does not populate: frozen-model lifecycle optimization of an authored, human-readable skill bank driven by production outcomes. 

What is new in FRAMES. Five elements, im-posed by regulated enterprise workflows, sepa-rate FRAMES from prior methods. The first is a pipeline contribution, the second is a search-mechanism contribution, and the remaining three are optimization constraints. 1. End-to-end lifecycle pipeline (cold start →

continuous update). Prior methods assume a curated skill set and a fixed test set already ex-ist. FRAMES cold-starts a skill bank and eval-uation cases directly from business policy (no seed skills or labels required), then re-improves on each new batch of production feedback— committing gains back to the bank across the system’s lifetime. No prior skill/prompt opti-mizer covers this full cold-start-to-continuous-update arc. 2. Consensus-filtered evolution operator. Pro-duction feedback is sparse and unlabeled, so a single diagnosis pass can latch onto noise. FRAMES’s search procedure is designed for this regime: each iteration runs a popula-tion of independent diagnosers over disjoint, per-iteration-reshuffled feedback batches and consolidates their proposals by agreement—a bagging-style denoising step that suppresses spurious single-diagnoser edits before any eval-uation budget is spent. Reshuffling across iter-ations lets correlated failures co-occur in fresh combinations, surfacing root causes a fixed par-tition would hide. Candidate skill sets are ex-plored by non-greedy, round-robin selection over a maintained Pareto frontier, so the search cannot collapse onto one end of the accuracy– cost trade-off. 3. Per-category regression floor. In regulated workflows, categories carry asymmetric risk: a regression on a compliance-critical cate-gory cannot be compensated by fixing low-risk cases. A single aggregate score—the standard in prior skill optimizers—structurally permits this masking. We enforce a per-category floor (P R c(P′) ≥ (1 − ϵ) P R c(P0) for every cate-gory c), which we are not aware of any pub-lished skill-optimization method providing. 4. Explicit accuracy–cost Pareto menu. At pro-duction volume, token cost is first-class: a skill set 2 points more accurate but 3 × costlier may be undeployable at bulk. Prior methods opti-mize accuracy toward one artifact (GEPA re-ports that evolved prompts tend to shorten but does not optimize cost as an objective). We make cost an explicit second objective and re-turn a menu of non-dominated operating points, chosen per workload by risk and budget. 5. Lifetime regression memory. Prior methods optimize once against a fixed test set. In produc-tion, a fix must survive future updates. We keep a persistent regression pool of previously re-solved cases and, on each round, re-check every candidate against a sample of this pool sized in proportion to the current evolution batch. This bounds evaluation cost as the pool grows while turning past fixes into recurring regression tests (§A.9 proves that detection capability does not degrade with pool size). Crucially, anchor cases from this pool are also injected into each rewrite as explicit behavioral constraints, so regressions are avoided at proposal time rather than merely rejected after evaluation. 23 Capability GEPA GRASP SAGE FRAMES (ours) 

Cold start from policy (no seed skills/labels) ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Continuous ingestion of production feedback ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Per-category regression floor ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Explicit accuracy–cost Pareto menu ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Lifetime anti-regression memory ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Consensus-filtered multi-diagnoser search ✗ ✗ ✗ ✓

Frozen model / auditable skill bank ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓

Regression awareness (any form) ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓

Table 5: Feature comparison of FRAMES against concurrent skill/prompt-evolution methods. GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2026) and GRASP (Moll et al., 2026) are frozen-model text-space optimizers; SAGE (Wang et al., 2026b) updates model weights via RL. FRAMES is the only method addressing the full cold-start-to-continuous-update lifecycle under compliance constraints. 

24