SKILLADAM: STABLE AND EFFICIENT
SKILL EVOLUTION FOR AGENTS
Gaoyuan Li1
Meihao Fan1
Yizhe Liu1
Shaolei Zhang1∗
Ju Fan1
Siyi Wang2
Jiaheng Hou2
Xudong Weng2
Honghan Tian2
Zang Li2
1Renmin University of China
2Tencent
{logey04,fmh1art,liuyizhe2004,zhangshaolei98,fanj}@ruc.edu.cn
{skylasywang,marvinhou,steveweng,abeltian,gavinzli}@tencent.com
ABSTRACT
Agent skills provide a lightweight way to equip frozen language-model agents
with domain knowledge and procedural guidance, yet obtaining high-quality skills
remains costly and difficult to scale.
Expert-written skills require substantial
human effort.
Recent skill self-evolution methods automate an iterative loop
that uses execution feedback to revise skills, but their heuristic update strate-
gies often yield unstable optimization and low
iteration efficiency. We iden-
tify two challenges in realizing stable and efficient skill self-evolution. Direc-
tion Stability requires effective corrections to accumulate rather than be over-
written by iteration-local feedback.
Update Adaptivity requires the scope of
each revision to reflect the consistency of recent case-level improvements.
We
introduce SKILLADAM, an Adam-inspired framework for optimizing discrete
and non-differentiable skill documents.
As a functional analogue of Adam’s
first moment, an optimization memory records identified problems and the out-
comes of prior solution attempts to stabilize the update direction. As a func-
tional analogue of Adam’s second moment, a volatility-driven edit budget tracks
the history-weighted variation of recent case-level improvements and adaptively
controls the update magnitude. Across seven benchmarks that span short- and
long-horizon tasks, SKILLADAM achieves state-of-the-art performance with more
stable optimization dynamics. It also obtains stronger skills with substantially
fewer optimization iterations and lower cost than prior methods. Code repository:
https://github.com/ruc-datalab/SkillAdam.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large language model (LLM) agents have emerged as a powerful paradigm for solving complex
real-world tasks through multi-step planning and tool use. Representative tasks include web inter-
action (Wang et al., 2025a), travel planning (Zhang et al., 2026b), data preparation (Fan et al., 2026;
Deng et al., 2026), and data discovery and analysis (Zhang et al., 2025; 2026c; Liu et al., 2026).
However, LLM agents often struggle in domain-specific scenarios because their general-purpose
capabilities cannot satisfy long-tail domain requirements. For example, planning a multi-city trip
requires reasoning about visa regulations, transportation dependencies, and airline-specific book-
ing policies. To address this challenge, recent agent frameworks introduce Agent Skills, defined
by Anthropic as modular packages of instructions and supporting resources that equip agents with
specialized capabilities (Anthropic, 2025).
However, high-quality Skills are both essential and difficult to obtain. SkillsBench shows that care-
fully curated Skills can substantially improve agent performance (Li et al., 2026), highlighting the
importance of high-quality Skills. In contrast, SkillAxe reports that Skills generated directly by
LLMs often remain ineffective without further refinement (Gautam et al., 2026), suggesting that
automatically constructing high-quality Skills remains a challenging problem. A common solution
is to rely on domain experts to manually author Skills based on their expertise, but this process is
time-consuming and labor-intensive. Another line of work employs language models to generate
∗Corresponding author.
1
arXiv:2609.08944v1  [cs.AI]  8 Sep 2026


Initial Skill
Random
Initialization
Final Skill
how much to revise?
generate a complete
new skill
what to revise?
preset rules
Optimal
Skill
(a) Existing SGD-like methods.
Optimal Skill
Initial Skill
Trajectory-Informed
Initialization
Optimization Memory
issue
issue
issue
issue
issue
Optimization
Direction
Volatility-Driven Edit Budget
case-level
changes
edit
budget
(Final Skill)
low
high
Skill Quality
(b) SKILLADAM (ours).
Figure 1: Conceptual comparison of iterative skill optimization strategies.
or refine Skills using manually designed prompts or heuristic rules. Although these methods re-
duce the burden of manual Skill authoring, they still rely heavily on human-designed prompts and
task-specific heuristics, limiting their ability to generalize across domains.
To reduce human intervention, recent studies have investigated automated Skill construction from
interaction experience. AutoManual incrementally updates structured rules and compiles them into
an instruction manual (Chen et al., 2024). Agent Skill Induction learns verified programmatic Skills
from web interactions (Wang et al., 2025a), while Trace2Skill synthesizes a unified Skill from a
diverse pool of execution traces (Ni et al., 2026). More recently, several studies have formulated
automated Skill construction as skill self-evolution. Some methods iteratively refine a Skill doc-
ument (Gautam et al., 2026; Alzubi et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026), while others evolve Skill pack-
ages or maintain Skill repositories (Zhang et al., 2026a; Ouyang et al., 2026). These approaches re-
duce manual effort by refining Skills over multiple iterations. As illustrated by the iteration-local
optimization path in Figure 1(a), however, existing methods still lack reliable control over what to
revise and how much to revise in each iteration.
To address this limitation, we propose SKILLADAM, a stable and efficient framework that aims
to preserve effective corrections across iterations while adapting each revision to the reliability of
recent evidence. Realizing these properties raises two challenges. The first is Direction Stability.
Since each iteration observes feedback from only a limited set of cases, successive revisions may
focus on different problems and undo one another. For example, one revision may instruct the agent
to minimize the total cost by selecting the cheapest feasible itinerary. A later revision may add more
attractions to produce a richer travel plan, but these additions can increase the cost and violate the
earlier budget constraint. New revisions must therefore remain consistent with effective corrections
accumulated in earlier iterations. The second challenge is Update Adaptivity. The appropriate
edit scope should depend on how consistently a recent revision affects the evaluated cases. If one
revision improves some cases but degrades others, a broad subsequent edit risks overwriting useful
guidance and should therefore be constrained. If the gains are consistent across cases, a broader edit
is better supported.
These challenges resemble those in stochastic optimization, where each update is based on partial
evidence and the appropriate step size depends on the scale of recent signals. Adam (Kingma &
Ba, 2015) provides two complementary design principles: aggregate historical update signals to
stabilize direction, and rescale the effective step size using accumulated signal magnitude. SKIL-
LADAM adopts these principles functionally in the discrete skill space rather than applying Adam
numerically.
As illustrated in Figure 1(b), SKILLADAM first constructs a trajectory-informed initial skill from ex-
ecution trajectories and their evaluation feedback. During self-evolution, an Evolving Issue Tracker
records identified problems, their current status, and the outcomes of prior solution attempts, al-
lowing each new update to consider both current feedback and accumulated evidence. In parallel,
a volatility-driven edit budget measures how unevenly a candidate changes case-level performance
and controls the allowable scope of the next modification. The tracker determines what should be
revised, while the budget determines how much may be revised. Together with trajectory-informed
2


Case 1
Case …
Case k
Mini-batch 𝐵!
Adam
Parameter 𝜃!"#
Prediction
𝑜! = 𝑓𝐵!; 𝜃!"#
Loss
ℒ! = ℒ𝑜!, 𝐵!
Gradient
𝑔! = 𝛻$ℒ! 𝜃
Second Moment
𝑣! = 𝛽%𝑣!"# + 1 −𝛽% 𝑔!
%, 𝑣ˆ! =
𝑣!
1 −𝛽%
!
First Moment
𝑚! = 𝛽#𝑚!"# + 1 −𝛽# 𝑔!, 𝑚ˆ ! =
𝑚!
1 −𝛽#
!
Δ𝜃! = −𝛼
𝑚ˆ !
𝑣ˆ! + 𝜖
𝜃! = 𝜃!"# + Δ𝜃!
Parameter 𝜃!
Rollout
1
Moment
Estimation
2
Parameter
Update
3
Sample from Dataset
(a) Adam inspiration. Adam aggregates first- and second-moment estimates to stabilize the update direction
and adapt the effective step size.
SkillAdam
Rollout
1
… …
…
Trajectories 𝒯!
Feedbackℱ!
"#$$
…
×𝑘in total
×𝑘in total
Case k
Case 1
Case …
Case k
Mini-batch 𝐵!
Case k
Case k
Case k
…
…
Sample
Current Skill 𝑆!%&
Satisfy clothing constraints.
Choose cheapest cart.
Verify constraints
Optimization Memory 
Volatility-driven Edit Budget
Moment Estimation
2
ℱ!
'($
…
ℱ!
"#$$
…
- Verify constraints
+ Map each…
+ Keep…
SkillPatch 𝑔!
Patch
Generator
Skill Update
3
Updated Skill 𝑆!
Satisfy clothing constraints.
Choose cheapest cart.
Map each requirement to one
cart item.
Keep requirements separate
Skill 𝑆!
Constraints missed
Cheaper cart missed
Items mismatched
Evolving Issue Tracker 𝑀!
Case-level Changes
Edit Budget
Improved
Not Improved
Apply on 𝑆!"#
(b) SKILLADAM framework. SKILLADAM uses the Evolving Issue Tracker and a volatility-driven edit budget
to provide analogous control over the direction and magnitude of skill updates in the discrete skill space.
Figure 2: Functional correspondence between Adam and SKILLADAM.
initialization, these components produce the more coherent and efficient optimization path shown in
Figure 1(b).
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We propose SKILLADAM, an Adam-inspired framework for stable and efficient skill self-
evolution.
• We introduce an optimization memory and a volatility-driven edit budget as functional analogues
of Adam’s first- and second-moment mechanisms, respectively stabilizing the optimization direc-
tion and adapting the update magnitude.
• We conduct extensive experiments on seven benchmarks, where SKILLADAM achieves state-of-
the-art performance while requiring substantially fewer optimization iterations and reducing over-
all optimization cost.
2
RELATED WORK
Agent Skills.
We follow Anthropic’s official definition of Agent Skills as modular packages of
instructions and supporting resources that equip an agent with specialized capabilities (Anthropic,
2025). Because Skills are stored independently of model parameters, the same package can be dis-
tributed to compatible agents without retraining. Earlier work had already externalized reusable
capabilities, although it did not share this package definition. Voyager stores executable programs in
a library that can be retrieved for later tasks (Wang et al., 2023). AutoManual learns structured rules
through interaction and compiles them into a readable instruction manual (Chen et al., 2024). Agent
Skill Induction learns and verifies programmatic skills for web agents (Wang et al., 2025a). Skills-
Bench provides a common evaluation of package-based Agent Skills and shows that curated Skills
improve agent performance across diverse tasks (Li et al., 2026). ExpeL and Agent Workflow Mem-
ory instead retain natural-language experience or reusable workflows from past executions (Zhao
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2025b). Our work focuses on Skills whose primary artifact is a natural-
language instruction document and studies their iterative optimization under task evaluation.
Prompt Optimization.
Automatic prompt optimization studies how to improve discrete language
artifacts without updating model parameters. OPRO proposes new instructions from previously
evaluated candidates and their scores (Yang et al., 2024). ProTeGi turns error feedback into tex-
3


tual gradients and applies search to select prompt edits (Pryzant et al., 2023). TextGrad propa-
gates natural-language feedback through a computation graph to optimize prompts and other textual
components (Yuksekgonul et al., 2024). GEPA uses reflective feedback from rollouts to evolve
prompts (Agrawal et al., 2026). ERM retains feedback from earlier attempts to support exemplar-
guided prompt optimization (Yan et al., 2025). They show that evaluation signals can guide discrete
textual updates without changing model parameters. Their optimization targets are prompts or com-
ponents of language-model programs, while SKILLADAM optimizes a reusable Agent Skill used
across task instances.
Skill Self-Evolution.
Recent work directly automates Agent Skill construction and revision.
Trace2Skill analyzes a broad pool of executions and consolidates trajectory-local lessons into a uni-
fied skill directory (Ni et al., 2026). SkillAxe iteratively diagnoses and refines LLM-authored skill
documents with structured evaluation signals (Gautam et al., 2026). EvoSkill discovers and revises
skills through failure analysis, then retains validated candidates through Pareto selection (Alzubi
et al., 2026). CoEvoSkills jointly evolves a Skill Generator and a Surrogate Verifier to construct
multi-file Skill packages without ground-truth test content (Zhang et al., 2026a). SkillOS trains a
curator that updates an external skill repository from accumulated experience (Ouyang et al., 2026).
SkillOpt is closest to our setting because it applies bounded textual edits to one skill document
and accepts an update only when validation performance improves (Yang et al., 2026). Their opti-
mization targets differ. Some optimize one document, while others construct packages or maintain
a repository. Across these settings, existing methods do not jointly maintain persistent optimizer
states for the direction and magnitude of successive revisions.
3
PRELIMINARIES
3.1
SKILL OPTIMIZATION PROBLEM
We consider a skill as a Markdown-formatted natural-language instruction that guides an agent’s
behavior in a target domain. In this work, we focus on Skills whose primary artifact is such a
structured natural-language instruction document. Let S denote the discrete space of possible skills
and D = {d1, . . . , dN} denote a task dataset.
Given a skill S ∈S and a task d ∈D, the domain evaluator returns structured case-level evaluation
feedback
E(S, d) = (E(S, d), C(S, d)) ,
(1)
where E(S, d) ∈Rm is an m-dimensional vector of domain-specific metrics, and C(S, d) denotes
optional diagnostic information, such as error descriptions or judge rationales. The metric vector E
supports numerical aggregation and acceptance decisions, whereas C is retained in F as language-
space evidence for patch generation and issue tracking. We use
F(S, B) = {E(S, d) | d ∈B}
(2)
to denote the evaluation feedback collected over a task batch B ⊆D.
Let Φ be a task-dependent aggregation function that maps task-level metric vectors to a scalar ob-
jective. We define
J(S) = Φ ({E(S, d) | d ∈D}) ,
S∗= arg max
S∈S J(S).
(3)
The target domain determines the precise forms of E and C, and its evaluation protocol determines
Φ. Equation 3 aggregates only E because J is numerical; the diagnostic content C remains available
through F to the LLM-based update and memory functions.
3.2
ADAM OPTIMIZATION
In differentiable optimization, Adam (Kingma & Ba, 2015) maintains exponential moving averages
of the first and second moments of stochastic gradients. Let ∇t = ∇θLt(θt−1) denote the stochastic
gradient of the mini-batch loss at iteration t. Adam updates
mAdam
t
= β1mAdam
t−1
+ (1 −β1)∇t,
(4)
vAdam
t
= β2vAdam
t−1
+ (1 −β2)∇2
t,
(5)
4


Here, mAdam
t
and vAdam
t
are the first- and second-moment estimates. The coefficients β1, β2 ∈
[0, 1) are exponential decay rates. The square is applied element-wise. Since both moment estimates
are initialized at zero, Adam applies bias correction:
bmAdam
t
= mAdam
t
1 −βt
1
,
bvAdam
t
= vAdam
t
1 −βt
2
.
(6)
The parameters are then updated as
θt = θt−1 −α
bmAdam
t
p
bvAdam
t
+ ϵ
,
(7)
where α > 0 is the base learning rate and ϵ > 0 is a small constant that prevents division by
zero and improves numerical stability. The first-moment estimate aggregates gradient information
across iterations to stabilize the update direction, while the second-moment estimate rescales the
base learning rate according to the recent squared-gradient magnitude, yielding an adaptive effective
step size. The ratio
αeff
t
=
α
p
bvAdam
t
+ ϵ
(8)
can be interpreted as the element-wise effective step size.
4
METHOD
To enable stable and efficient skill self-evolution in a discrete skill space, we propose SKILLADAM
with two Adam-inspired mechanisms: an Evolving Issue Tracker that stabilizes the update direction
and a volatility-driven edit budget that adapts the update magnitude. We describe the framework and
its components below.
4.1
THE SKILLADAM FRAMEWORK
Framework Overview.
Figure 2 presents the SKILLADAM cycle. It begins with rollout, after
which moment estimation informs the skill update. Before iterative optimization begins, SKIL-
LADAM constructs an initial skill S0 from execution trajectories and their evaluation feedback. At
iteration t, the current skill is executed on a sampled mini-batch, and the optimizer states carried
from the previous iteration, Mt−1 and σt, guide the generation of a candidate modification. After
the candidate has been evaluated, the Evolving Issue Tracker compares the rollout and validation
outcomes and evolves the structured issue list that constitutes the optimization memory Mt. The
same paired feedback is used to update the improvement-volatility estimate.
The three blocks in Figure 2 describe functional roles. They do not prescribe a strict within-iteration
execution order. In particular, the memory and volatility states obtained from the validation out-
come of iteration t guide the skill update at iteration t + 1. The complete operational order is
given in Algorithm 1, while Table 1 summarizes the functional correspondence between Adam and
SKILLADAM.
Rollout.
At iteration t, SKILLADAM samples a mini-batch Bt ⊂D and executes the agent with
the current skill St−1:
Tt = Rollout (St−1, Bt) ,
(9)
where Tt denotes the collected execution trajectories. The domain evaluator then produces the cor-
responding case-level evaluation feedback
Froll
t
= F (St−1, Bt) ,
(10)
as defined in Equation 2. The trajectories record how the agent behaves during execution, while
Froll
t
contains the resulting metric scores and diagnostic information. Together, (Tt, Froll
t
) provide
the iteration-specific optimization signal used to generate the next skill update.
5


Moment Estimation.
SKILLADAM maintains two persistent optimizer states across iterations.
The optimization memory is instantiated as an Evolving Issue Tracker (EIT), denoted by Mt, while
the volatility estimate Vt controls the magnitude of subsequent updates. Both states are refreshed
after the candidate skill has been evaluated and are then carried into the next iteration.
The Evolving Issue Tracker is represented as a collection of structured issue entries:
Mt = {Ij | j ∈Jt} ,
Ij = (pj, zj, Aj) ,
(11)
where Jt is the set of issue identifiers recorded through iteration t. The pair (pj, zj) describes an
error pattern and its current status. The set Aj stores previous solution attempts with their observed
outcomes. The tracker therefore maintains each issue and its resolution history.
After the candidate skill at iteration t has been evaluated, the tracker directly evolves its state:
Mt = UEIT
 Mt−1, Tt, Froll
t
, gt, Fval
t
, at

.
(12)
The LLM-based update function UEIT compares the rollout and validation outcomes to maintain the
issue records. It links observed failures to existing issues when possible and creates entries when
needed. It also records each attempted modification with its outcome and reopens an issue when the
same failure recurs.
The Evolving Issue Tracker serves as a functional analogue of Adam’s first-moment estimate:
mAdam
t
←→
Mt.
(13)
Both states integrate current evidence with information accumulated across previous iterations.
Adam aggregates numerical gradients. The Evolving Issue Tracker instead accumulates issue histo-
ries and solution outcomes to stabilize the update direction.
SKILLADAM additionally estimates how consistently the candidate affects the evaluated cases. Let
Eroll
t,i
and Eval
t,i denote the case-level feedback for the current and candidate skills, respectively, on
case di ∈Bt. The case-level improvement is
δt,i = s
 Eval
t,i

−s
 Eroll
t,i

,
di ∈Bt,
(14)
where s(·) extracts the benchmark-specific scalar score used to measure improvement. The mean
case-level improvement is
δt =
1
|Bt|
X
di∈Bt
δt,i.
(15)
SKILLADAM estimates the current improvement volatility using
bVt =
1
|Bt| −1
X
di∈Bt
 δt,i −δt
2 ,
|Bt| ≥2.
(16)
When fewer than two valid case-level comparisons are available, we set bVt = 0. A high value
indicates that the candidate produces substantially different effects across cases, while a low value
indicates more consistent effects.
The history-weighted volatility estimate is updated as
Vt = β2Vt−1 + (1 −β2)bVt,
V0 = 0.
(17)
The edit budget for the next iteration is then computed by
σt+1 = max

bmin,

bbase

1 −clip
 Vt
Vmax
, 0, 1

,
(18)
where bbase is the base edit budget and bmin is the minimum allowable budget. The volatility satu-
ration threshold is Vmax. High volatility yields a smaller edit budget, while low volatility permits a
broader modification. The budget used at iteration t, σt, is determined from the state accumulated
through iteration t −1.
This mechanism provides the following correspondence:
vAdam
t
←→
Vt,
αeff
t
←→
σt+1.
(19)
The optimization memory therefore determines which problems should guide the subsequent update,
while the volatility-driven edit budget determines how extensively the skill may be modified.
6


Skill Update.
At iteration t, the LLM-based patch generator proposes a skill modification condi-
tioned on the current rollout evidence and the optimizer states carried from the previous iteration:
gt = GLLM
 St−1, Tt, Froll
t
, Mt−1, σt

.
(20)
Here, Tt and Froll
t
describe the behavior observed in the current iteration, Mt−1 provides cross-
iteration guidance on which problems should be addressed, and σt controls the allowable scope of
the modification.
Applying the generated modification to the current skill produces a candidate:
eSt = Apply (St−1, gt) .
(21)
The candidate is evaluated on the same mini-batch used for the current-skill rollout:
Fval
t
= F

eSt, Bt

.
(22)
Consequently, Froll
t
and Fval
t
provide directly comparable case-level feedback for the current and
candidate skills.
A benchmark-specific acceptance gate determines whether the candidate should replace the current
skill:
at = Gθ

St−1, eSt, Froll
t
, Fval
t

∈{0, 1}.
(23)
The skill is updated as
St =
(
eSt,
at = 1,
St−1,
at = 0.
(24)
The Evolving Issue Tracker uses each attempted modification and its evaluated outcome to evolve
from Mt−1 to Mt. The same paired feedback is used to compute bVt and Vt. The updated skill and
optimizer state are carried into the next iteration, closing the optimization loop shown in Figure 2.
4.2
ALGORITHM AND ADAM CORRESPONDENCE
Algorithm 1 presents the operational order of SKILLADAM. The current skill first produces rollout
trajectories and evaluation feedback on a sampled mini-batch. The optimizer states carried from the
previous iteration then guide the generation of a candidate skill. After the candidate has been evalu-
ated on the same cases, SKILLADAM decides whether to accept it and uses the resulting comparison
to evolve the Evolving Issue Tracker and update the volatility estimate. These updated states guide
the next iteration.
Figure 2 provides a block-level comparison between Adam and SKILLADAM, while Table 1 makes
the correspondence between their optimization quantities explicit. The analogy is functional, not nu-
merical. SKILLADAM does not compute gradients in the discrete skill space. It constructs language-
space states that serve the same optimization roles.
The rollout feedback Froll
t
plays a loss-like role by evaluating the current behavior, while the gen-
erated patch gt serves as the gradient-like local update signal in the skill space. The Evolving
Issue Tracker Mt accumulates issue histories and solution outcomes across iterations, analogous to
Adam’s first moment. Similarly, Vt aggregates recent improvement variability and determines the
next edit budget σt+1.
5
EXPERIMENTS
5.1
BENCHMARKS
We evaluate SKILLADAM on seven benchmarks that cover knowledge work and interactive plan-
ning. Six benchmarks contribute one evaluation slice each. DeepPlanning contributes Shopping
Levels 1–3 and Travel EN, giving ten slices in total. Each benchmark uses its native task environ-
ment, tool interface, and evaluator.
7


Algorithm 1 SKILLADAM: Adam-Inspired Skill Self-Evolution
Require: Task dataset D, evaluator E, mini-batch size k, maximum iterations Tmax, EMA coeffi-
cient β2, budget parameters bbase, bmin, Vmax, and random seed ξ
Ensure: Optimized skill STmax
1: (T0, F0) ←CollectInitializationData(D, E, ξ)
2: S0 ←InitializeLLM(T0, F0)
3: M0 ←∅
4: V0 ←0
5: σ1 ←bbase
6: for t = 1, 2, . . . , Tmax do
7:
Bt ←Sample(D, k, ξ + t),
Tt ←Rollout(St−1, Bt),
Froll
t
←F(St−1, Bt)
8:
gt ←GLLM(St−1, Tt, Froll
t
, Mt−1, σt),
eSt ←Apply(St−1, gt)
9:
if eSt = null then
10:
St ←St−1,
Mt ←Mt−1,
Vt ←Vt−1,
σt+1 ←σt
11:
continue
12:
end if
13:
Fval
t
←F(eSt, Bt),
at ←Gθ(St−1, eSt, Froll
t
, Fval
t
)
14:
if at = 1 then
15:
St ←eSt
16:
else
17:
St ←St−1
18:
end if
19:
Mt ←UEIT
 Mt−1, Tt, Froll
t
, gt, Fval
t
, at

20:
{δt,i}di∈Bt ←∆
 Froll
t
, Fval
t

21:
bVt ←Var ({δt,i}di∈Bt)
22:
Vt ←β2Vt−1 + (1 −β2)bVt
23:
σt+1 ←max

bmin,
j
bbase
h
1 −clip

Vt
Vmax , 0, 1
im
24: end for
25: return STmax
Table 1: Core functional correspondence between Adam and SKILLADAM. The correspondence is
functional, with evaluation feedback and a language-space patch serving the roles of the loss and
gradient.
Adam
SKILLADAM
Functional role
Parameters θt−1
Current skill St−1
Represent the optimized state
Prediction ot
Execution trajectories Tt
Record the execution output
Loss Lt
Evaluation feedback Froll
t
Evaluate the current behavior
Gradient ∇t
Skill patch gt
Provide the local update signal
First moment mAdam
t
Evolving Issue Tracker Mt
Stabilize the update direction
Second moment vAdam
t
Historical volatility Vt
Accumulate update variability
Effective step size αeff
t
Edit budget σt+1
Adapt the update magnitude
Apply ∆θt
Apply and gate gt
Update the optimized state
Updated parameter θt
Accepted skill St
Carry the state forward
We classify five benchmarks as short-horizon, as they require fewer than ten tool calls per task on
average. SearchQA (Dunn et al., 2017) evaluates open-domain question answering with noisy re-
trieved context. SpreadsheetBench (Ma et al., 2024) requires an agent to modify spreadsheets from
natural-language instructions. OfficeQA (Opsahl-Ong et al., 2026) evaluates question answering
over historical U.S. Treasury Bulletins. DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2021) evaluates visual question an-
swering over document images. LiveMathematicianBench (LMB; also abbreviated as LiveMath in
the tables) (He et al., 2026) evaluates reasoning over mathematical theorems and proof sketches. The
two long-horizon benchmarks require at least ten tool calls per task on average. ALFWorld (Shrid-
har et al., 2021) contains text-based embodied household tasks. DeepPlanning (Zhang et al., 2026b)
evaluates multi-step shopping and travel planning.
8


Metrics.
We report the standard primary metric for each benchmark.
SearchQA, OfficeQA,
and LMB use Exact Match. SpreadsheetBench uses hard task success, which requires the com-
plete spreadsheet-editing task to pass. DocVQA uses ANLS-hard. ALFWorld uses episode goal-
completion rate. DeepPlanning reports Shopping Case Accuracy and Travel Case Accuracy. DP-
Shopping pools the three shopping levels by case count, with 25, 25, and 10 test cases. DP-Travel
contains 60 test cases. We define DP-Avg = (DP-Shopping +DP-Travel)/2 using the unrounded
domain-level accuracies. It is not an equal average of the four DeepPlanning slices. All main results
are percentages.
5.2
BASELINES
We compare SKILLADAM with seven baselines. NoSkill runs the target agent without an injected
skill. HumanSkill uses an expert-authored skill, and LLMSkill uses a skill written in one LLM
call. The optimization baselines are Trace2Skill (Ni et al., 2026), TextGrad (Yuksekgonul et al.,
2024), GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2026), and SkillOpt (Yang et al., 2026).
For the five short-horizon benchmarks, baseline results are taken from the GPT-5.5 no-harness set-
ting reported by SkillOpt. For ALFWorld, the NoSkill result is taken from SkillOpt, and we re-
produce the SkillOpt result in our environment. For DeepPlanning, we reproduce both NoSkill and
SkillOpt in the task environment used for SKILLADAM. Within each benchmark, the compared
methods use the same target-agent configuration, test cases, and evaluator. SKILLADAM and Skil-
lOpt also start from the same initial skill, which is constructed from a fixed set of baseline execution
trajectories.
SkillOpt retains its original train and selection split together with its native selection, slow-update,
and optimizer-memory procedures. We run SkillOpt for four epochs under this protocol.
5.3
SETUP
Common Protocol.
All experiments use a no-harness, direct-chat setting. The agent interacts with
the native task interface and evaluator of each benchmark without an additional orchestration layer.
Skills are injected as natural-language instructions, and the target model remains frozen during op-
timization. We use GPT-5.5 for the six benchmarks outside DeepPlanning. These runs use medium
reasoning effort, a temperature of 1.0, and a maximum output length of 16,384 tokens. DeepPlan-
ning uses Claude Sonnet 4.5 with a temperature of 0.0 and the same output limit. Travel EN uses a
separate frozen model to convert the generated plan into the required format before evaluation.
Initialization and Optimization.
SKILLADAM and SkillOpt share an initial skill constructed
from fixed baseline execution trajectories. For the six benchmarks outside DeepPlanning, SKIL-
LADAM merges the original train and selection partitions into one optimization pool. SkillOpt
retains the original split. The test partition is unchanged and is used only for final evaluation.
DeepPlanning uses an odd-even split by case identifier. Odd-numbered cases are used for opti-
mization, and even-numbered cases are reserved for testing. We use seed 42 for local case sampling,
optimization-pool shuffling, and other controlled random operations.
On the six benchmarks outside DeepPlanning, SKILLADAM makes one pass through the optimiza-
tion pool and uses a benchmark-specific stopping rule. DeepPlanning samples optimization batches
at random and uses task-specific stopping criteria. At each iteration, SKILLADAM evaluates the
current skill and its proposed revision on the same sampled cases. Their execution trajectories and
evaluation feedback are passed to the optimizer states described in Section 4.1.
Acceptance Protocol.
The acceptance gate uses the benchmark’s primary and auxiliary metrics. A
proposed revision is accepted when at least one designated metric reaches its improvement threshold
and every protected metric remains within its regression boundary. An auxiliary metric can therefore
support acceptance when the primary metric is unchanged. SKILLADAM does not use an additional
validation set for this decision. SkillOpt follows its native selection and slow-update rules.
Evaluation.
Each test case is evaluated once with the target-agent configuration specified above.
9


Table 2: Main results on five short-horizon benchmarks. Baselines follow the GPT-5.5 no-harness
results reported by SkillOpt. Scores are percentages. Bold and underlining mark the best and second-
best values.
Method
SearchQA
Spreadsheet
OfficeQA
DocVQA
LiveMath
NoSkill
77.7
41.8
33.1
78.8
37.6
HumanSkill
81.8
72.9
66.9
90.1
38.4
LLMSkill
80.9
43.2
51.7
89.6
40.0
Trace2Skill
82.4
49.6
65.7
90.6
52.0
TextGrad
81.4
41.1
42.0
87.2
49.2
GEPA
84.8
73.6
63.9
89.1
43.2
SkillOpt
87.3
80.7
72.1
91.2
66.9
SKILLADAM
87.5
81.1
72.1
92.3
67.7
Table 3: Main results on ALFWorld with GPT-5.5 and DeepPlanning with Claude Sonnet 4.5. DP-
Avg averages the unrounded DP-Shopping and DP-Travel accuracies. Scores are percentages. Bold
and underlining mark the best and second-best values.
Method
ALFWorld
DP-Shopping
DP-Travel
DP-Avg
NoSkill
83.6
31.7
0.0
15.8
SkillOpt
87.3
41.7
1.7
21.7
SKILLADAM
89.6
45.0
11.7
28.3
5.4
MAIN RESULTS
We compare SKILLADAM with all baselines on two categories of benchmarks, i.e., short-horizon
benchmarks and long-horizon benchmarks. The results are recorded in Table 2 and Table 3.
Results on Short-Horizon Benchmarks.
As illustrated in Table 2, SKILLADAM achieves the
overall best performance among all baselines, with four strict wins and one tie on five benchmarks.
Specifically, SKILLADAM achieves remarkably better performance compared with HumanSkill and
LLMSkill, with an average improvement of 14.45% and 31.20% respectively. This is because SKIL-
LADAM adopts iterative skill optimization instead of one-shot skill generation. Thus, it can optimize
the skill based on the evaluation result of the immediate agent rollouts, which produces higher-
quality skills. In addition, compared with the second-best methods, i.e., SkillOpt, SKILLADAM still
shows better performance. For example, SKILLADAM achieves higher accuracy on DocVQA and
LiveMath, with an improvement of 1.21% and 1.20%. This improvement stems from two technical
designs of SKILLADAM, i.e., Optimization Memory and Volatility-driven Edit Budget. With these
designs, we can optimize the skills more stably. Thus, we can produce better skills than SkillOpt.
Results on Long-Horizon Benchmarks.
Table 3 reports the long-horizon results. As illustrated
in the table, the advantages of SKILLADAM are more prominently demonstrated. Specifically, while
both NoSkill and SkillOpt nearly fail on DP-Travel, SKILLADAM achieves an accuracy of 11.7%.
Moreover, compared with SkillOpt, SKILLADAM improves DP-Avg from 21.7% to 28.3%, a gain
of 6.7 percentage points computed from the unrounded accuracies. The results demonstrated that
our proposed evolution algorithm can work better on more challenging tasks.
In summary, SKILLADAM achieves the best overall performance compared with other baselines,
demonstrating the effectiveness of the proposed skill evolution strategy.
5.5
ABLATION STUDIES
We conduct a cumulative ablation study on DeepPlanning to examine the two core mechanisms.
Starting from the full framework, we first remove the volatility-driven edit budget and then addition-
ally remove the optimization memory. Thus, each row removes one additional component from the
configuration above it. All variants follow the same training and evaluation protocol.
10


Table 4: Cumulative ablation on DeepPlanning. M and B denote the optimization memory and
volatility-driven edit budget. Each row removes one additional component. Scores are percentages,
and bold marks the best value in each column.
Configuration
DP-Shopping
DP-Travel
DP-Avg
L1
L2
L3
All
SKILLADAM (M + B) 52.0
36.0
50.0
45.0
11.7
28.3
−B
48.0
36.0
40.0
41.7
1.7
21.7
−B, −M
56.0
20.0
30.0
36.7
1.7
19.2
NoSkill
40.0
24.0
30.0
31.7
0.0
15.8
Table 5: Cross-model transfer from GPT-5.5 to GPT-5.4-mini. Score denotes target-model task per-
formance. Retention measures the percentage of source-model performance preserved after transfer.
Both metrics are percentages. Bold marks the better result between SkillOpt and SKILLADAM.
Method
Metric
SearchQA DocVQA Spreadsheet ALFWorld LiveMath OfficeQA Average
NoSkill
Score
75.9
71.4
36.1
73.1
14.7
22.1
48.9
SkillOpt
Score
80.8
90.4
61.4
66.4
28.2
51.2
63.1
SkillOpt
Retention
92.6%
99.1%
76.1%
76.1%
42.2%
71.0%
76.2%
SKILLADAM Score
78.9
91.2
65.0
82.8
33.1
55.8
67.8
SKILLADAM Retention
90.2%
98.8%
80.1%
92.4%
48.9%
77.4%
81.3%
As illustrated in Table 4, the full SKILLADAM achieves the best overall result, increasing DP-Avg
from 19.2% without both mechanisms to 28.3%. Specifically, with Optimization Memory fixed,
adding the Volatility-driven Edit Budget improves DP-Avg by 6.7 percentage points, with the largest
gain occurring on DP-Travel. This result supports the importance of Update Adaptivity in long-
horizon planning. Specifically, when a revision produces inconsistent effects across cases, reducing
the next edit scope can avoid damaging previously correct constraints, whereas consistent improve-
ments permit broader updates.
Optimization Memory provides a complementary benefit. Without the edit budget, adding memory
raises DP-Avg from 19.2% to 21.7%, with gains on Shopping L2 and L3 despite a decrease on L1.
The concentration of gains on the more difficult levels suggests that recording issue states and prior
solution outcomes helps preserve and reconcile multiple corrections across iterations, thereby main-
taining a more stable optimization direction. However, because this is a cumulative ablation, it does
not independently isolate the effect of memory when the edit budget is enabled or the interaction
between the two mechanisms.
5.6
CROSS-MODEL TRANSFER
We evaluate whether the optimized skills remain effective when transferred to a different agent back-
bone. Specifically, the skills produced by SKILLADAM and SkillOpt using GPT-5.5 are deployed
verbatim on GPT-5.4-mini without further optimization or adaptation. We conduct this evaluation
on six benchmarks supported by both backbones.
Table 5 reports the task score obtained on GPT-5.4-mini and the corresponding retention ratio. Let
ssrc and stgt denote the scores obtained on GPT-5.5 and GPT-5.4-mini, respectively. We define the
retention ratio as Retention = stgt/ssrc. A higher retention ratio indicates that a larger fraction of
the skill’s source-model performance is preserved after transfer. No-Skill results on GPT-5.4-mini
are included as reference performance and are taken from Yang et al. (2026).
As illustrated in Table 5, SKILLADAM achieves higher target-model scores on five of the six bench-
marks and higher retention ratios on four of the six benchmarks. Compared with SkillOpt, SKIL-
LADAM improves the average target-model score from 63.1% to 67.8% and the average retention
ratio from 76.2% to 81.3%. The advantage remains after excluding ALFWorld, indicating that the
improvement is not driven by a single benchmark; SearchQA is the only target-score exception.
11


ALFWorld
DocVQA
SearchQA
Spreadsheet
OfficeQA
LMB
DP/L1
DP/L2
DP/L3
DP/Travel
1
2
3
4
5
Overall score (1–5)
SkillAdam (ours)
Avg Score of SkillAdam (ours)
SkillOpt
Avg Score of SkillOpt
Figure 3: Overall skill-quality scores on a 1–5 scale across ten benchmark slices. Each value aver-
ages the six dimension medians from three independent calls to the same GPT-5.5 judge. Horizontal
markers show the mean across slices.
These results show that the skills optimized by SKILLADAM transfer more effectively across agent
backbones. A plausible explanation is that Optimization Memory consolidates recurring problems
and evaluated solution attempts across iterations, encouraging the final skill to capture task-level
procedures rather than source-model-specific wording. The transfer experiment evaluates the com-
plete framework, however, and therefore does not isolate which component is responsible for the
gain.
5.7
SKILL QUALITY ANALYSIS
Beyond task performance, we evaluate the optimized skills with a frozen GPT-5.5 judge. The com-
parison covers ten benchmark slices, including six individual benchmarks and four DeepPlanning
slices. Each skill is evaluated through three independent calls to the same judge model. The input
does not reveal the method name. Each call assigns a score from 1 to 5 on six dimensions. Task
Alignment and Non-Obvious Insight measure relevance. Constraint Handling and Decision Frame-
work measure operational guidance. Cognitive Load and Inference Efficiency measure usability.
For each dimension, we take the median of the three scores. The overall score for a skill is the mean
of these six medians. We then average the overall scores across the ten benchmark slices.
As illustrated in Figure 3, SKILLADAM obtains a higher skill-quality score than SkillOpt on all ten
benchmark slices, increasing the mean score from 3.30 to 3.88. Because every paired comparison
favors SKILLADAM, the improvement is consistent across tasks rather than being driven by a small
number of benchmarks.
This result complements the task-performance results in Section 5.4. The benchmark metrics mea-
sure whether the agent completes the task, whereas the judge evaluates whether the skill provides
relevant, operational, and usable guidance. The agreement between the two evaluations suggests that
SKILLADAM improves not only downstream execution but also the quality of the skill document it-
self. This improvement is consistent with Optimization Memory preserving useful constraints and
the Volatility-driven Edit Budget limiting uncontrolled revisions. However, the judge experiment
evaluates the complete framework, and Figure 3 aggregates all six dimensions; it therefore isolates
neither an individual component nor a single quality dimension.
5.8
TRAINING COST
We compare optimization-phase API use for SKILLADAM and SkillOpt on the four DeepPlanning
slices. Both methods use Claude Sonnet 4.5 and optimize over the same cases. The counts cover
the optimization and iteration phase. They exclude initial-skill generation and final test evaluation.
Unrelated smoke tests are also excluded. Token counts come from the raw counters returned by the
API and do not represent a dollar cost. We report input tokens, output tokens, and API requests
together with the resulting DeepPlanning performance.
12


Table 6: Optimization-phase API use and DeepPlanning test performance. API-use deltas are rela-
tive reductions. Performance deltas are absolute percentage-point differences.
Metric
SkillOpt
SKILLADAM
Delta
Input Tokens
222.1M
72.5M
−67.3%
Output Tokens
4.5M
1.5M
−66.8%
Total Tokens
226.6M
74.0M
−67.3%
API Requests
9,071
2,830
−68.8%
Resulting test performance (higher is better)
DP-Shopping
41.7%
45.0%
+3.3 pp
DP-Travel
1.7%
11.7%
+10.0 pp
DP-Avg
21.7%
28.3%
+6.7 pp
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Iteration
30
40
50
60
Test Case Accuracy (%)
(a) Accuracy vs. Iteration
0
10
20
30
40
50
Cumulative Tokens (M)
30
40
50
60
Test Case Accuracy (%)
(b) Accuracy vs. Token Cost
Seed
SkillAdam (ours)
SkillOpt
Accepted
Rejected
Slow-update
Figure 4: Optimization dynamics on DeepPlanning Shopping Level 1.
As illustrated in Table 6, SKILLADAM reduces total token consumption by 67.3% and API requests
by 68.8% compared with SkillOpt, while improving DP-Avg from 21.7% to 28.3%. Thus, the lower
optimization cost is not achieved by sacrificing the quality of the final skill.
The two methods consume a similar number of tokens per request, and SKILLADAM is slightly
higher on this measure. Therefore, the reduction does not come from shorter individual calls, but
from requiring fewer optimization requests and modification attempts. This result is consistent with
the two technical designs of SKILLADAM: Optimization Memory avoids repeatedly rediscovering
previously identified failures, while the Volatility-driven Edit Budget reduces broad, weakly sup-
ported revisions. Measured by DP-Avg per million optimization tokens, SKILLADAM is approxi-
mately four times as efficient as SkillOpt.
6
ANALYSES
We analyze SKILLADAM and SkillOpt on DeepPlanning Shopping Level 1. Both methods use
Claude Sonnet 4.5 and start from the same initial skill, which has 40% test case accuracy. One
iteration denotes one minibatch-level modification attempt. SKILLADAM compares the current skill
with its proposed revision on the same sampled optimization cases and applies its multi-metric
acceptance gate. SkillOpt follows its native selection and slow-update rules. The markers in Figure 4
therefore record the decision made by each method’s own update protocol.
The figure reports the post-hoc test accuracy of every evaluated modification. Panel (a) uses the
minibatch-level iteration index, and Panel (b) uses cumulative token consumption. Test performance
is shown only for analysis and does not determine whether a modification is accepted. A modifica-
tion with a high test score can still be rejected by the cases and metrics used in the corresponding
update protocol.
13


6.1
STABILITY
As illustrated in Figure 4(a), SKILLADAM finds a strong revision in the first iteration, and all subse-
quent accepted skills remain above the initial performance. In contrast, SkillOpt’s accepted regular
updates fluctuate around or below its starting performance, while its later high-scoring candidates
are not retained. This comparison shows that SKILLADAM produces a more stable accepted opti-
mization path.
The result is consistent with the design of Optimization Memory. By retaining previously iden-
tified issues, their status, and the outcomes of prior solutions, SKILLADAM can incorporate new
feedback without repeatedly overwriting useful corrections. The acceptance gate further prevents
insufficiently supported revisions from replacing the current skill. The rejected SKILLADAM revi-
sion at iteration 8 nevertheless has a high post-hoc test score. This does not contradict the stability
result because acceptance is determined only by sampled optimization cases and protected metrics,
while the test score is used solely for retrospective analysis. Since the figure reports one run and
memory operates together with the gate, it characterizes the overall optimization behavior rather
than isolating the causal effect of memory alone.
6.2
EFFICIENCY
As illustrated in Figure 4(b), SKILLADAM reaches an accepted skill with 56% test accuracy af-
ter approximately 4M tokens, whereas SkillOpt first produces a comparably strong candidate after
approximately 20M tokens and does not accept it. SKILLADAM therefore reaches and retains a
stronger skill with about one fifth of the token cost in this run.
Combined with the similar token cost per request in Table 6, the result shows that the efficiency gain
comes from fewer unproductive modification attempts rather than cheaper individual calls. This be-
havior is consistent with the two core mechanisms: the Volatility-driven Edit Budget restricts broad
edits when recent case-level effects are inconsistent, and Optimization Memory prevents repeated
rediscovery of earlier failures. Together, they allow SKILLADAM to identify useful revisions with
fewer iterations.
7
CONCLUSION
We introduced SKILLADAM, a gradient-inspired framework for iterative skill self-evolution that
adapts the two principles behind Adam to the skill space. An optimization memory accumulates
structured records across iterations to provide stability, and a volatility-driven edit budget scales
each update to the reliability of the improvement evidence to provide adaptivity. Across seven
benchmarks that span short-horizon and long-horizon agentic tasks, SKILLADAM achieves state-of-
the-art performance at substantially lower training cost. Its skills also transfer better across models.
REFERENCES
Lakshya A. Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong,
Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J. Ryan, Meng Jiang, Christopher Potts, Koushik
Sen, Alexandros G. Dimakis, Ion Stoica, Dan Klein, Matei Zaharia, and Omar Khattab. GEPA:
Reflective prompt evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. In International Confer-
ence on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2507.
19457. Oral presentation.
Salaheddin Alzubi, Noah Provenzano, Jaydon Bingham, Weiyuan Chen, and Tu Vu.
EvoSkill:
Automated skill discovery for multi-agent systems. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.02766, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.02766.
Anthropic.
Introducing Agent Skills, October 2025.
URL https://claude.com/blog/
skills.
Minghao
Chen,
Yihang
Li,
Yanting
Yang,
Shiyu
Yu,
Binbin
Lin,
and
Xiaofei
He.
AutoManual:
Constructing instruction manuals by LLM agents via interactive envi-
ronmental
learning.
In
Advances
in
Neural
Information
Processing
Systems,
vol-
14


ume 37, 2024. URL https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/
0142921fad7ef9192bd87229cdafa9d4-Abstract-Conference.html.
Chao Deng, Shaolei Zhang, Ju Fan, and Xiaoyong Du. DataEvolver: Automatic data preparation
for large language models through multi-level self-evolving. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.07001,
2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.07001.
Matthew Dunn, Levent Sagun, Mike Higgins, V. Ugur Guney, Volkan Cirik, and Kyunghyun Cho.
SearchQA: A new Q&A dataset augmented with context from a search engine. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1704.05179, 2017. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/1704.05179.
Meihao Fan, Ju Fan, Yuxin Zhang, Shaolei Zhang, Xiaoyong Du, Jie Song, Peng Li, Fuxin Jiang,
Tieying Zhang, and Jianjun Chen. DeepPrep: An LLM-powered agentic system for autonomous
data preparation. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 19(11):3371–3384, 2026. doi: 10.14778/
3836663.3836695. URL https://www.vldb.org/pvldb/vol19/p3371-fan.pdf.
Srishti Gautam, Arjun Radhakrishna, and Sumit Gulwani. SkillAxe: Sharpening LLM-authored
agent skills through evaluation-guided self-refinement. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.10546, 2026.
URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.10546.
Linyang He, Qiyao Yu, Hanze Dong, Baohao Liao, Xinxing Xu, Micah Goldblum, Jiang Bian, and
Nima Mesgarani. LiveMathematicianBench: A live benchmark for mathematician-level reason-
ing with proof sketches. arXiv preprint arXiv:2604.01754, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2604.01754.
Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/
1412.6980.
Xiangyi Li et al. SkillsBench: Benchmarking how well agent skills work across diverse tasks. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.12670, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2602.12670.
Yizhe Liu, Shaolei Zhang, and Ju Fan. DA-Studio: An agentic system for end-to-end data analy-
sis. Proceedings of the VLDB Endowment, 19(12):4766–4769, 2026. doi: 10.14778/3827998.
3828117. URL https://www.vldb.org/pvldb/vol19/p4766-liu.pdf.
Zeyao Ma, Bohan Zhang, Jing Zhang, Jifan Yu, Xiaokang Zhang, Xiaohan Zhang, Sijia Luo,
Xi Wang, and Jie Tang. SpreadsheetBench: Towards challenging real world spreadsheet ma-
nipulation.
In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2024.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.14991. Spotlight.
Minesh Mathew, Dimosthenis Karatzas, and C.V. Jawahar. DocVQA: A dataset for VQA on doc-
ument images. In IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
2021. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.00398.
Jingwei Ni, Yihao Liu, Xinpeng Liu, Yutao Sun, Mengyu Zhou, Pengyu Cheng, Dexin Wang, Er-
chao Zhao, Xiaoxi Jiang, and Guanjun Jiang. Trace2Skill: Distill trajectory-local lessons into
transferable agent skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25158, 2026. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2603.25158.
Krista Opsahl-Ong, Arnav Singhvi, Jasmine Collins, Ivan Zhou, Cindy Wang, Ashutosh Baheti,
Owen Oertell, Jacob Portes, Sam Havens, Erich Elsen, Michael Bendersky, Matei Zaharia, and
Xing Chen. OfficeQA Pro: An enterprise benchmark for end-to-end grounded reasoning. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2603.08655, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2603.08655.
Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, Yanfei Chen, Rujun Han, Zifeng Wang, Bhavana Dalvi Mishra, Rui Meng,
Chun-Liang Li, Yizhu Jiao, Kaiwen Zha, Maohao Shen, Vishy Tirumalashetty, George Lee, Ji-
awei Han, Tomas Pfister, and Chen-Yu Lee. SkillOS: Learning skill curation for self-evolving
agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.06614, 2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.
06614.
15


Reid Pryzant, Dan Iter, Jerry Li, Yin Lee, Chenguang Zhu, and Michael Zeng.
Automatic
prompt optimization with “gradient descent” and beam search.
In Proceedings of the 2023
Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, pp. 7957–7968. Associ-
ation for Computational Linguistics, 2023.
doi: 10.18653/v1/2023.emnlp-main.494.
URL
https://aclanthology.org/2023.emnlp-main.494/.
Mohit Shridhar, Xingdi Yuan, Marc-Alexandre Cˆot´e, Yonatan Bisk, Adam Trischler, and Matthew
Hausknecht. ALFWorld: Aligning text and embodied environments for interactive learning. In
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2021. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2010.03768.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2305.16291.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Apurva Gandhi, Graham Neubig, and Daniel Fried.
Inducing program-
matic skills for agentic tasks. In Conference on Language Modeling, 2025a. URL https:
//openreview.net/forum?id=lsAY6fWsog.
Zora Zhiruo Wang, Jiayuan Mao, Daniel Fried, and Graham Neubig.
Agent workflow mem-
ory.
In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning, volume
267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 63897–63911. PMLR, 2025b.
URL
https://proceedings.mlr.press/v267/wang25bx.html.
Cilin Yan, Jingyun Wang, Lin Zhang, Ruihui Zhao, Xiaopu Wu, Kai Xiong, Qingsong Liu, Guoliang
Kang, and Yangyang Kang. Efficient and accurate prompt optimization: The benefit of memory
in exemplar-guided reflection. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for
Computational Linguistics, pp. 753–779. Association for Computational Linguistics, 2025. doi:
10.18653/v1/2025.acl-long.37. URL https://aclanthology.org/2025.acl-long.
37/.
Chengrun Yang, Xuezhi Wang, Yifeng Lu, Hanxiao Liu, Quoc V. Le, Denny Zhou, and Xinyun
Chen. Large language models as optimizers. In International Conference on Learning Represen-
tations, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2309.03409.
Yifan Yang, Ziyang Gong, Weiquan Huang, Qihao Yang, Ziwei Zhou, Zisu Huang, Yan Li, Xuemei
Gao, Qi Dai, Bei Liu, Kai Qiu, Yuqing Yang, Dongdong Chen, Xue Yang, and Chong Luo.
SkillOpt: Executive strategy for self-evolving agent skills. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.23904,
2026. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2605.23904.
Mert Yuksekgonul, Federico Bianchi, Joseph Boen, Sheng Liu, Zhi Huang, Carlos Guestrin, and
James Zou. TextGrad: Automatic “differentiation” via text. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.07496,
2024. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.07496.
Hanrong Zhang, Shicheng Fan, Henry Peng Zou, Yankai Chen, Zhenting Wang, Jiayu Zhou,
Chengze Li, Wei-Chieh Huang, Yifei Yao, Kening Zheng, Xue Liu, Xiaoxiao Li, and Philip S.
Yu.
CoEvoSkills: Self-evolving agent skills via co-evolutionary verification.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2604.01687, 2026a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2604.01687.
Shaolei Zhang, Ju Fan, Meihao Fan, Guoliang Li, and Xiaoyong Du. DeepAnalyze: Agentic large
language models for autonomous data science. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.16872, 2025. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2510.16872.
Yinger Zhang, Shutong Jiang, Renhao Li, Jianhong Tu, Yang Su, Lianghao Deng, Xudong Guo,
Chenxu Lv, and Junyang Lin. DeepPlanning: Benchmarking long-horizon agentic planning with
verifiable constraints. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.18137, 2026b. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2601.18137.
Yuxin Zhang, Ju Fan, Meihao Fan, Shaolei Zhang, and Xiaoyong Du. CoDA-Bench: Can code
agents handle data-intensive tasks?
In Proceedings of the 43rd International Conference on
Machine Learning, 2026c. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2606.15300.
16


Andrew Zhao, Daniel Huang, Quentin Xu, Matthieu Lin, Yong-Jin Liu, and Gao Huang. ExpeL:
LLM agents are experiential learners. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.10144, 2023. URL https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2308.10144.
17
