Title: LensDesigner: A Self-Improving Agent for Optical Lens Design

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.30450v1

Published Time: Mon, 28 Sep 2026 00:08:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
# LENS DESIGNER : A Self-Improving Agent for Optical Lens Design 

Lei Sun 1,∗ Haoran Liang 1,∗ Dannong Xu 1 Yao Gao 2 Yuyu Geng 2

Jinjin Gu 1 Kaiwei Wang 2,† Danda Pani Paudel 1 Luc Van Gool 11INSAIT, Sofia University “St. Kliment Ohridski” 

> 2

Zhejiang University 

> ∗

Equal contribution. †Corresponding author. 

leo_sun@zju.edu.cn wangkaiwei@zju.edu.cn 

## Abstract 

Optical lens design is a complex, non-convex optimization challenge that relies heavily on human experience and intuition. Existing optimized-based automatic lens design methods struggle to navigate this vast parameter space without metic-ulous manual tuning. In this paper, we present L ENS DESIGNER , an autonomous agent framework that mirrors the problem-solving workflow of expert opticians. To overcome the initial cold start problem, we construct LensLib100K, an extensive optical lens library, and employ Optics-Aware Retrieval to supply physically valid structural seeds. Within an interactive physical simulation environment, the agent executes macroscopic orchestration while receiving immediate optical feedback. Furthermore, we introduce a continuous self-evolving mechanism guided by a curriculum agent. By iteratively solving design tasks with progressively increas-ing difficulty, the agent autonomously extracts, accumulates, and reuses design heuristics, effectively evolving its optical lens design expertise over time. At the evaluation level, we introduce LensArena, a standardized evaluation bench-mark comprising 120 diverse optical design tasks, covering extreme configurations. Extensive experiments on this benchmark demonstrate that L ENS DESIGNER sig-nificantly outperforms publicly available baseline algorithms, achieving superior success rates and optimization efficiency. We hope this work sheds light on the emerging field of intelligent optics. The code will be publicly available. 

## 1 Introduction 

Optical lens design is a fundamental pillar of modern science and technology, underpinning advance-ments in diverse fields ranging from consumer electronics and augmented reality to medical imaging and space exploration. However, designing a high-quality lens system is a notoriously challenging, non-convex optimization problem involving a vast, high-dimensional parameter space (e.g., curva-ture, thickness, glass materials). Crucially, navigating this complex space is intrinsically a highly 

experience-dependent endeavor and heavily relies on human expert intuition. As show in Fig. 1, a typical design process requires an experienced optician to propose an initial lens structure based on decades of accumulated domain knowledge, trial, and error, followed by iterative refinements using commercial optical simulation software like Zemax [2] or CODE V . Without this experience-driven high-quality initial starting point, traditional optimization algorithms easily fall into local optima, making the process highly inefficient. Recently, artificial intelligence has shown great potential in accelerating scientific discovery. However, applying AI to optical design remains fundamentally bottlenecked by the limitations of current methodologies. For instance, approaches utilizing traditional evolutionary algorithms for lens 

> 40th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2026). arXiv:2609.30450v1 [cs.CV] 24 Sep 2026

Manual Lens Design         

> Design Spec
> FoV: 135 °
> #F: 3. 8
> d: 3.6mm
> Optics-Aware Retrieval
> Initial Seed •Singlet
> •Achromatic Doublet
> •Cooke Triplet
> •Double Gauss
> …
> •3P/4P/5P Mobile Phone Lens
> •Wide-angle Lens
> •Telephoto Lens
> •Ultra-Large Aperture Lens
> …
> Skill Set Skill Set
> Years of Experience
> Design Agent
> Change Material
> Modify Curvature
> Ray Tracing
> Physical Check
> …
> Calculate EFFL
> Curriculum
> Optics-Aware
> Self-Evolving
> Reflection
> Skill Library
> Tool
> Number of Years
> Design Difficulty
> Number of Loops
> Design Difficulty

LENS DESIGNER Figure 1: Manual lens design is a highly experience-dependent task that typically requires years of accumulated human expertise. Similarly, L ENS DESIGNER mimics this trajectory through a self-evolving mechanism, continuously accumulating skills to advance its optical design capabilities. optimization [11, 12, 37] demand extensive fine-grained parameter tuning that is difficult for users lacking expert intuition. Moreover, these techniques suffer from prohibitive computational costs, frequently needing several days to successfully converge on a single lens design. Conversely, methods relying on simple database query and matching [8] fail to handle novel target specifications outside their existing scope, lacking the autonomous intelligence needed for original design. Meanwhile, although Large Language Models (LLMs) are not inherently designed for precise numerical calculation or optimization, they encode rich optical domain knowledge. More importantly, recent advancements in autonomous agents have proven that LLMs can effectively utilize memory and skill modules to continuously learn, and self-evolve [27, 24, 32, 31, 1]. Therefore, while LLM agents possess immense potential to tackle such highly experience-dependent tasks, their application in automated optical lens design remains an unexplored frontier. In this paper, we propose L ENS DESIGNER , an autonomous agent framework that mirrors the workflow of human experts. Experienced opticians rarely design from scratch. Instead, they rely on known configurations as initial seeds. We replicate this crucial heuristic by constructing a large-scale optical lens library, dubbed LensLib100K, based on an enhanced implementation of the state-of-the-art optimization algorithm QGSO [11]. This comprehensive dataset encompasses a wide spectrum of common lens specifications. Leveraging this library, we design Optics-Aware Retrieval strictly grounded in fundamental optical design principles. For every new design requirement, this module retrieves the most suitable configuration from the library to serve as a physically valid initial seed. Once the initial seeds are retrieved, L ENS DESIGNER undertakes substantial macro orchestration within an interactive optical design environment. The agent autonomously executes actions, such as inserting new elements or altering glass materials, and receives immediate evaluation feedback from an underlying physical simulator regarding the optical merit function and structural validity. To simulate the experience accumulation of a human optician, our framework introduces a continuous evolution mechanism driven by a dedicated curriculum agent. This curriculum agent continuously generates physically valid optical design tasks with progressively increasing difficulty. As L ENS -DESIGNER attempts to solve these generated problems, it actively interacts with the environment and reflects on both successful and erroneous design trajectories based on the simulator feedback. By analyzing these outcomes, the LLM extracts generalized optical design heuristics and commits these validated strategies to an optical skill library for future reuse. This continuous cycle of problem solving, reflection, and memorization enables L ENS DESIGNER to continuously evolve, transforming its approach from basic trial and error into mature design intuition. Finally, the framework invokes traditional local optimization algorithms to perform meticulous parameter tuning, guiding the newly synthesized lens to its precise local optimum. Beyond these methodological advancements, the field of automated optical design currently lacks a standardized benchmark to fairly evaluate the capabilities of different algorithms. Hence, we introduce LensArena, a comprehensive benchmark comprising 120 diverse optical design tasks. This challenging benchmark systematically covers both common lens configurations and extreme optical systems, including ultra-wide-angle lenses with a Field of View (FoV) up to 180° and large-aperture lenses with an F-number (#F) as small as 0.7, etc. Utilizing LensArena, we rigorously test all publicly available automatic lens design algorithms to establish a comprehensive evaluation standard. Extensive experiments on this benchmark demonstrate that our proposed L ENS DESIGNER 

significantly outperforms existing methods by consistently generating valid lens structures, achieving the highest success rate, and yielding the smallest (root-mean-square) RMS spot radius for optimal imaging quality. 2In summary, we deliver the following contributions: • We propose L ENS DESIGNER , a novel agent framework specifically designed to automate the highly empirical and complex process of optical lens design by mirroring human expert intuition. • We introduce a continuous evolution mechanism driven by a curriculum agent, enabling the system to autonomously extract, accumulate, and reuse optical design heuristics, progres-sively advancing its lens design expertise through iterative problem solving. • We construct LensLib100K, an extensive optical lens library, and introduce LensArena, a standardized evaluation benchmark, laying a robust foundation for future intelligent optical design research. 

## 2 Related Work 

Automatic Lens Design. Traditional optical design is highly empirical, relying on expert intuition and software tools like Zemax that function as numerical calculators rather than autonomous decision-makers. Existing automation attempts include global optimization algorithms [11, 19], neural networks [37], and retrieval-based methods like LensNet [8]. However, these approaches often require meticulous manual tuning, suffer from prolonged convergence times, or are constrained by fixed database distributions. In contrast, L ENS DESIGNER enables rapid, text-driven generation of compliant configurations, bypassing the need for specialized domain expertise and intensive parameter adjustment. 

LLM-based Agents for Scientific Design. Large Language Models (LLMs) such as GPT-5 and Qwen-3 have evolved into sophisticated reasoning engines capable of powering autonomous agents [25, 34]. By integrating tool utilization and environmental feedback, these agents have rev-olutionized specialized fields including chemistry [4], robotics [6], and software engineering [40]. Despite these successes, the application of autonomous entities to the highly empirical and numeri-cally sensitive domain of optical design remains largely unexplored. We bridge this gap by introducing a self-evolving agentic framework specifically optimized for the physics-heavy requirements of lens design. For more detailed related work, please kindly refer to Appendix B. 

## 3 LENS DESIGNER 

In this work, we focus on classical imaging lens design, whose goal is to arrange and optimize the shape, spacing, and materials of refractive components to minimize aberrations and project a sharp image onto a sensor. This optimization process ensures the system meets strict imaging specifications, such as field-of-view (FoV), F-number (#F), and effective focal length (EFFL). As a pioneering effort in this domain, our work focuses exclusively on spherical lenses. 

3.1 Lens Design Preliminaries 

A standard system comprises four fundamental structures: the object plane originating the target scene, the optical elements sequentially refracting incoming light, the stops restricting light bundles to control brightness, and the image plane capturing the final picture. In a lens system, the Field of View (FoV) defines the maximum angular extent of the observable environment. The F number (#F) characterizes the size of the optical aperture, representing the ratio of the focal length to the entrance pupil diameter and dictating the overall light-gathering capability. The optical format ( d) denotes the physical diagonal diameter of the image sensor, while its corresponding semi-image height y defines the maximum radial boundary of focused light. Furthermore, the Effective Focal Length (EFFL) represents the focal length of the optical system, and the Total Track (TOTR) indicates the overall physical length of the entire lens assembly. These configurations fundamentally determine the physical characteristics and practical applications of the lens. Finally, the Root Mean Square (RMS) of the focal spot radius serves as the most fundamental quantitative indicator for reflecting the actual imaging sharpness and evaluating overall optical aberrations. Further theoretical details are provided in Appendix A. 33.2 Overview 

Inspired by the empirical workflow of human optical engineers, L ENS DESIGNER operates as a closed-loop autonomous system that integrates knowledge retrieval, interactive reasoning, and self-evolution. The overall pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 3. The Optics-Aware Retrieval identifies physically compatible initial seeds from our LensLib100K to ensure a good starting point. Then, the framework utilizes Macro Orchestration to coordinate an Optical Tool Suite, which executes structural modifications and local optimizations under strict physical guardrails. By continuously reflecting on and accumulating expertise throughout the design process, the system achieves a closed-loop evolution of design intuition. 

3.3 LensLib100K Large-Scale Lens Generation. Considering the highly free and empirical process of optical design, designing a large number of lenses manually is practically infeasible. Although current automated optical design methods remain imperfect, they can produce a substantial volume of satisfactory designs under simpler conditions, such as narrow FoV and large #F, provided they are guided by manual parameter tuning over several months. QGSO utilizes a genetic algorithm-based framework [17] to optimize a population of randomly initialized lens structures through iterative mutation and selection. By integrating hybrid global and local optimization to produce diverse, high-quality designs, it currently represents the state-of-the-art in optimization-based lens design. Building upon the QGSO framework, we introduce two enhancements to bridge the gap between simulation-based optimization and practical optical engineering: First, we enforce the use of real glass catalogs instead of virtual materials, ensuring the optimized parameters are practically manufacturable. Second, we integrate a ray aiming [9] mechanism to guarantee high-fidelity ray tracing under large FoVs. Overall, these improvements enhance the manufacturability of the design outcomes, which makes the produced lens more applicable. 

Figure 2: Distribution of LensLib100K and LensArena. LensArena spans more challenging edge cases. 

Data Distribution Leveraging our extended QGSO framework, we invested approximately 

2000 GPU hours of intensive computation to generate a comprehensive collection of 180000 

distinct lens designs. These generated configura-tions exhibit remarkable diversity across critical specifications. Specifically, the FoV spans from 

8◦ to 118 ◦, and the #F ranges from 1.6 to 6.0.Data distribution is shown in Fig. 2. To the best of our knowledge, our LensLib100K rep-resents the most extensive optical lens database currently available to the research community. It not only serves as a practical foundation for direct structural retrieval within our L ENS DESIGNER 

framework but also offers a substantial collection of high-quality training data to support future research in data-driven automatic optical design. 

Optics-Aware Retrieval To effectively leverage LensLib100K, we introduce an Optics-Aware Retrieval mechanism acting as a physics-grounded selector. Retrieval criteria used in conventional semantic RAG methods are fundamentally ill-suited for optical design. In optics, a system’s physical properties are determined by the complex interplay of multiple query requirements, rather than isolated parameters. Consequently, retrieving candidates based merely on the closest individual numerical values does not necessarily yield the optimal solution. To overcome this, we utilize simulator-in-the-loop labeling, where every lens undergoes offline paraxial ray tracing to pre-compute physical metrics before indexing. This ensures retrieval relies purely on deterministic optical performance. Furthermore, we score candidates using a novel asymmetric optical prior distance. This metric heavily penalizes deviations in the FoV, as angular topologies are notoriously difficult to expand during subsequent optimization. It also applies a directional asymmetry to the #F. Retrieving a candidate with a smaller aperture than the target incurs a strict penalty because expanding an aperture introduces severe edge aberrations, whereas a candidate with a larger aperture is penalized lightly since stopping down the aperture is optically safe and physically stable. Overall, this strategy strictly 4Target 

Specification 

> FoV: 135 °
> #F: 3. 8
> d: 3.6mm
> User Design
> Request

LENS DESIGNER  Optics-Aware 

Self-Evolving            

> LensLib100K
> Optics-Aware
> Retrieval
> Retrieved Initial SEED Design Agent
> Change Material
> Modify Curvature
> Ray Tracing
> Physical Checking
> Calculate EFFL
> Calculate RMS
> Local Optimization
> Merit function
> EFFL Alignment:
> align_effl → Scale 0.087 ×, EFFL:
> 17.07mm → 1.49mm, RMS=0.016mm
> Physical Repair:
> Physical constraints repaired
> Aperture Correction:
> modify_lens → Aperture stop adjusted
> for F/3.8
> Local Optimization:
> local_optimize → RMS=0.055mm
> F/3.79 EFFL=1.49mm
> Skill Retrieval: Reused Skill L-1044.
> Direct Execution: Skipped planning and reused skill operations. Scaled EFFL:
> 17.07 mm → 1.49 mm
> Zemax Verification: RMS = 0.003 mm.
> F/# = 3.72, EFFL = 1.11 mm
> …
> Skill Library …
> no exact match, closest FOV=118 °
> F/4.6
> Assess_and_plan:
> EFFL gap 91%:
> 17.07mm → 1.49mm
> (scale 0.087 ×)
> F# gap 21%:
> 4.6 → 3.8
> Plan: align_effl →
> auto_fix_physics →
> modify_lens →
> zemax_optimize
> Skill Accumulation
> Experiments
> Reuse

Figure 3: Main pipeline of L ENS DESIGNER . Given a design query, the framework retrieves the closest seeds from LensLib100K, followed by Macro Orchestration for systematic optimization and Optics-Aware Self-Evolving for continuous capability enhancement via a curriculum-based agent. enforces optical similarity, guaranteeing that the retrieved initial seeds are intrinsically aligned with the physical demands of the target query. 

3.4 Self-Evolving for Optical Lens Design 

Following the retrieval of seed structures, the design agent refines the configuration through a highly integrated pipeline comprising an optical tool suite, macro orchestration, and an optics-aware self-evolving mechanism. 

Optical Tool Suite. Referring to the manual optical lens design workflow, we deploy a physically grounded optical tool suite. First, we geometrically scale the entire lens to match the target effective focal length (EFFL) without altering the relative aberration profile. Second, we perform single-surface parameter adjustments under strict physical guardrails, such as automatic stop recognition and dynamic #F synchronization. To resolve severe higher-order aberrations, we intelligently divide a single positive lens into a doublet while strictly conserving the original optical power ϕorig :

ϕorig = nd − 1

Rorig 

, ϕ1 = r · ϕorig , ϕ2 = (1 − r) · ϕorig , Ri = nd − 1

ϕi

(1) where nd is the material refractive index, Rorig is the original surface radius, r defines the power distribution ratio, ϕ1 and ϕ2 are the resulting split optical powers, and Ri denotes the new respective radii. For continuous refinement, we apply a finite-difference gradient descent algorithm. To prevent this local optimization from sacrificing macroscopic specifications for localized image sharpness, the objective function explicitly penalizes EFFL deviation: 

]RMS (R) = RMS (R) + β · RMS 0 · max 



0, |EFFL − EFFL 0||EFFL 0| − τ



(2) where ]RMS (R) and RMS (R) represent the penalized objective and the current root-mean-square spot radii given the lens parameters R. Furthermore, RMS 0 and EFFL 0 indicate the initial spot radius and target focal length, β is the penalty weight, and τ defines the allowable tolerance threshold. Finally, we execute rigorous Damped Least Squares (DLS) [20] ray tracing to guarantee the physical validity of the final design. 

Macro Orchestration. Instead of relying on open-ended reasoning paradigms, we orchestrate the agent using a deterministic standard operating procedure embedded within the system prompt. This strategy strictly enforces a logical design sequence, guiding the agent systematically from initial candidate retrieval to macroscopic alignment, localized modification, and final verification. To optimize computational efficiency, we introduce a two-tier evaluation mechanism. The agent first applies rapid paraxial approximations to instantly filter out configurations with extreme EFFL or #F deviations. Only designs passing this preliminary gate proceed to the computationally expensive 

Zemax ray tracing. Furthermore, to guarantee workflow stability, a sliding window circuit breaker continuously monitors tool trajectories, actively halting the process if identical action sequences repeat to prevent infinite loops. 5Optics-Aware Self-Evolving Mechanism To emulate the experience accumulation process of manual optical lens design, we employ a dual-agent architecture comprising a curriculum agent and a design agent, as shown in Fig 3. In the self-evolving process, the curriculum agent generates design queries with progressively increasing difficulty, advancing from conventional specifications to challenging optical parameters. The design agent then attempts to solve these tasks, autonomously distilling and accumulating strategies across the curriculum. During each session, the design agent records detailed trajectories that explicitly link geometric actions to their corresponding physical metric changes, such as fluctuations in the RMS spot radius and EFFL. Importantly, the evolving mechanism extracts insights from both successful and failed attempts. By analyzing successful resolutions of difficult queries alongside critical failures (e.g. invalid material substitutions or unfeasible scaling limits), the agent learns both advanced design pathways and valuable physical boundary conditions. To prevent storing trivial textbook knowledge, we use a knowledge-grounded distillation prompt that extracts only novel strategies and extreme parameter adjustments. These validated skills are serialized into a persistent library and dynamically injected into future prompts, enabling L ENS DESIGNER to achieve continuous, zero-shot capability evolution without costly model weight updates. 

3.5 LensArena Benchmark 

In the domain of automated classical imaging lens design, recent methods [11, 37] only evaluate their performance on a handful of isolated design cases. This limited testing scope is primarily due to the immense computational overhead associated with traditional optimization pipelines. However, evaluating on restricted samples introduces randomness and bias and fails to rigorously reflect the generalization capabilities of these algorithms. Currently, the field lacks a large-scale, comprehensive testing baseline. Hence, we introduce our LensArena benchmark. Our LensArena focuses specifically on classical imaging lens design. Since commonly used optical systems are highly mature and easily solved, modern engineering increasingly focuses on more challenging and extreme configurations like ultra-wide FoVs and large apertures. To rigorously test the limits of state-of-the-art automated methods against these frontiers, we structured our benchmark to reflect these modern demands. Given that full physical optical optimization is exceptionally time-consuming, our carefully curated set of 120 unique design queries constitutes a remarkably comprehensive evaluation suite. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 2, LensArena deliberately includes a high proportion of challenging designs, covering a broad and diverse spectrum of specifications with the FoV ranging from 5◦ to 180 ◦ and the #F spanning from 0.7 to 8.0. Notably, this benchmark is ex-ceptionally challenging, as 70% of the design queries are out-of-distribution relative to LensLib100K. Furthermore, the benchmark queries are systematically categorized into three distinct difficulty levels. For each specific task, we define a target RMS spot radius threshold dictated by its intrinsic difficulty. A generated lens configuration is recorded as a success strictly if its final optimized radius falls below this predefined standard. To the best of our knowledge, LensArena stands as the first benchmark dedicated to the systematic evaluation of automated optical system design. For examples from the LensArena benchmark, please kindly refer to Appendix G 

## 4 Experiments 

4.1 Experimental Setup Implemental Details. We leverage Gemini-3.0-flash [13], Kimi-2.4 [21], ChatGPT-5.2 [22], and Qwen3-32b [34] as the foundation LLMs, respectively, and Gemini-3-flash [13] for the optics-aware retrieval reranker and the self-evolve distiller, with lens-spec embeddings produced by text2vec-base [33] on a FAISS index. All LLM temperatures are set to 0 to ensure reproducibility. Our optical simulator couples an in-house paraxial ray-tracer (for offline Optics-Aware Retrieval labeling, online verification, and gradient-based local optimize) with Ansys Zemax OpticStudio [2] accessed through ZOS-API/pythonnet behind a Flask bridge. Zemax is the sole source of truth for final RMS / EFFL / #F. See Appendix F.1 for more details 

Evaluation Metrics. Given the absence of prior similar works in this domain, we formally define three primary metrics to evaluate the generated lens designs. The Success Rate measures the percentage of tasks where the final RMS spot radius successfully reaches a predefined target 6Table 1: Main results evaluated on the LensArena Benchmark.                                                                                              

> Success Rate (%) ↑Avg RMS ( μm )↓
> Method Easy Medium Hard Easy Medium Hard
> [Existing Baselines]
> LensNet [8] 50.0 39.3 30.0 3.89 8.99 7.99 QGSO [11] 25.0 22.7 13.3 24.2 17.7 11.1 DeepLens [37] 4.2 1.5 029.6 41.1 -
> [In Context Learning Baselines]
> Gemini-3.0-flash 37.5 36.3 26.7 43.56 94.7 120.4
> ChatGPT-5.2 33.3 27.3 26.7 52.68 90.85 112.4
> Kimi-2.4 33.3 16.6 23.3 44.7 87.45 108.7
> Qwen-3-8b 8.3 12.1 20 96.32 147.7 215.3
> Qwen-3-32b 16.6 21.2 20 67.83 124.23 176.43
> LENS DESIGNER (Ours)
> w/ Gemini-3.0-flash 87.5 83.3 80.0 3.7 7.5 12.7
> w/ ChatGPT-5.2 87.5 83.3 66.7 6.5 6.9 14.8
> w/ Kimi-2.4 87.5 74.2 56.7 9.0 7.8 11.0
> w/ Qwen-3-8b 70.8 51.5 40.0 6.5 9.2 14.8
> w/ Qwen-3-32b 75.0 75.8 70.0 4.9 8.2 7.8

Figure 4: Results on the LensArena benchmark. The evaluation demonstrates that our proposed method achieves superior structural rationality, a higher success rate, and a significantly lower RMS spot radius compared to the baselines. threshold, which varies dynamically based on the specific problem difficulty. The Avg RMS denotes the average RMS spot radius, sampled at 0, 0.7, and 1.0 times the maximum FoV. As the standard metric for optical evaluation, a smaller RMS indicates tighter ray convergence and superior image quality. Note that the Avg RMS is averaged only over the subset of successful designs, excluding failed queries. 

Baselines To comprehensively evaluate our proposed approach, we compare it against three pub-licly available automated lens design methods and specifically constructed language model baselines. LensNet [8] serves as a data-driven baseline, utilizing a database retrieval mechanism combined with simple geometric scaling. QGSO [11] is an optimization-based approach powered by genetic algorithms. It stands as the current SOTA in automated optical design and can generate most conven-tional lens structures, though it suffers from exceedingly slow optimization speeds. DeepLens [37] represents a deep-learning-based framework that employs curriculum learning strategies to formulate lens configurations. Given the complete absence of existing LLM-based frameworks for this specific domain, we introduce LLM-based in-context-learning (ICL) baselines. This method relies on standard in-context learning and is driven by the exact same foundation language model as our framework to ensure a rigorously fair comparison. 

4.2 Results Comparison on the LensArena Benchmark. Tab. 1 presents the quantitative evaluation of L ENS -DESIGNER against existing computational baselines and ICL approaches across three difficulty levels. Compared to existing deep learning and heuristic optimization baselines, our proposed framework demonstrates a substantial leap in both capability and design robustness. Specifically, powered by 

Gemini-3.0-flash , L ENS DESIGNER achieves a remarkable success rate of 87.5% on the Easy 7(a).  DeepLens  (d). Kimi -ICL  (e).  LENS DESIGNER  (Ours) (b). QGSO  (c).  Lensnet Figure 5: Visualized results of lens layouts and spot diagrams from the LensArena benchmark. LENS DESIGNER consistently yields optimal structural configurations and achieves the minimal RMS spot size, outperforming other methods in both design rationality and imaging quality. split and maintains a highly robust 80.0% success rate even on the Hard split. In stark contrast, prior methods struggle significantly as the problem complexity increases; their success rates on Hard tasks degrade to 30.0% at best (LensNet) or fail completely (0% for DeepLens). Furthermore, while conventional optimization methods typically require several hours to explore the complex, non-convex parameter space, our agentic framework converges to high-quality optical solutions (e.g., yielding an Avg RMS of just 12.7 μm on Hard queries) in merely tens of seconds. As shown in Fig. 4, since LensNet is a retrieval-based method, it achieves a relatively high success rate for structures covered by its database. However, 60% of its generated structures fail during optical ray tracing because they fall outside the scope of its library. Conversely, although DeepLens produces valid structures in approximately 80% of cases, its final performance compliance rate is notably low. In contrast, our proposed method consistently yields a vast majority of structurally valid designs while achieving a superior compliance rate for the required RMS spot radius. Compared to LLM-based baselines, relying solely on open-ended, prompt-based ICL proves highly ineffective for stringent engineering tasks. As shown in Tab. 1, standard ICL approaches suffer from remarkably low success rates and massive RMS errors across all difficulty tiers due to frequent physical violations and poor convergence. In contrast, our fully equipped L ENS DESIGNER pipeline consistently and significantly outperforms its corresponding ICL counterparts across every metric. This substantial performance margin confirms that integrating domain-specific tools, optics-aware retrieval, and systematic macro orchestration is essential to unlock the true potential of foundation models in physical optical design. 

Example Analysis. As the lens layouts and the corresponding RMS spot diagrams shown in Fig. 5, L ENS DESIGNER generates highly practical and physically valid optical structures. The layout visualization demonstrates a rational distribution of optical power across the generated glass elements, effectively managing internal ray angles to minimize spherical aberrations and chromatic dispersion. Furthermore, the accompanying spot diagrams confirm exceptional ray convergence at the focal plane. The tightly concentrated focal spots indicate that the generated designs strictly satisfy the demanding imaging specifications. This superior optical performance directly validates the effectiveness of our LENS DESIGNER .Skills  

> Success Rate (%)
> Skill Distillation Trajectory Self -Evolving Trajectory
> Iterations Iterations

Figure 6: Trajectory of self-evolving. 

Self-Envolving. To empirically validate the continuous learning capability of our framework, we track and visualize the distilled skills and success rate across progressive self-evolving it-erations in Fig 6. As illustrated, as the skills are accumulated over iterations, the overall success rate exhibits a steady and significant upward trajectory as the number of iterations increases. This definitive learning curve directly proves the efficacy of our optics-aware evolving mechanism. It demonstrates that L ENS DESIGNER is not merely executing static rule-based procedures, but is actively and effectively exploring the highly complex optical design space. By continuously distilling advanced strategies from both novel successes and boundary-testing failures, the agent progressively elevates its intrinsic optical engineering proficiency. 8Figure 7: Ablation study on the core components of L ENS DESIGNER . The violin plots illustrate the distribution of RMS spot radii across different model variants on the LensArena benchmark. Table 2: Ablation study on the core components of L ENS DESIGNER using the LensArena Benchmark. All variants are evaluated on the identical foundation model for fair comparison.                                                           

> Success Rate (%) ↑Avg RMS ( μm )↓
> Method Easy Medium Hard Easy Medium Hard
> w/o LensLib100K 25.0 39.3 26.7 89.6 194.4 293.4
> w/ LensLib100K + Vanilla RAG 58.3 51.5 40.0 35.1 128.1 189.6
> w/o Optical Tool Suite 66.7 63.6 26.7 37.1 54.7 68.9
> w/o Macro Orchestration 80.0 69.7 33.3 21.8 34.2 87.9
> [Self-Envolving]
> w/o Reflection 66.7 60.6 46.7 26.1 31.2 81.4
> w/o Skill Library 66.7 72.7 46.7 23.2 31.2 81.4
> LENS DESIGNER (Final) 91.7 70.0 53.2 19.2 33.4 48.8

4.3 Ablation Study 

To validate the effectiveness of each core module within L ENS DESIGNER , we conduct a comprehen-sive ablation study using Gemini-2.5 [15], as summarized in Table 2. 

Optics-Aware Retrieval: Removing LensLib100K entirely forces the agent to design from scratch, leading to the worst overall performance. Furthermore, replacing our optics-aware retrieval with a Vanilla RAG yields sub-optimal initial seeds, resulting in a severe degradation of the RMS spot radius, particularly on hard queries (189.6 μm vs. 48.8 μm ). This demonstrates the necessity of matching candidates based on deterministic physical metrics rather than mere semantic proximity. 

Tool Suite & Macro Orchestration: Ablating the Optical Tool Suite or Macro Orchestration significantly reduces the success rate and increases aberration errors. This indicates that relying solely on the open-ended reasoning of large language models is insufficient for optical design. Strict physical guardrails and systematic, deterministic workflows are essential for continuous convergence. 

Self-Evolving Mechanism: We further ablate the components of the self-evolving module. Removing either the reflection mechanism (which analyzes errors) or the skill library (which stores persistent cross-task heuristics) leads to notable performance drops on medium and hard tasks. This confirms that dynamically distilling and transferring historical experience is critical for mastering complex optical specifications. Overall, the full L ENS DESIGNER pipeline achieves the highest success rates and the lowest Avg RMS across all difficulty tiers. 

## 5 Conclusion 

In this paper, we introduced L ENS DESIGNER , the first large language model-driven agent framework for automated classical imaging lens design. To comprehensively evaluate performance in this domain, we also proposed LensArena, the first large-scale and systematic benchmark tailored for optical system design. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our approach significantly outperforms existing optimization-based and deep-learning-based methods in both success rate and design efficiency, particularly on complex tasks with extreme optical parameters. 

Limitations and Future Work. Currently limited to spherical lenses, L ENS DESIGNER faces challenges in scaling to aspheric or freeform surfaces and suffers from latency due to external ray-tracing software. Future efforts will extend its capabilities to non-spherical and complex folded systems to further automate optical engineering. 9References 

[1] Emre Can Acikgoz, Cheng Qian, Jonas Hübotter, Heng Ji, Dilek Hakkani-Tür, and Gokhan Tur. Tool-r0: Self-evolving llm agents for tool-learning from zero data, 2026. [2] Ansys, Inc. Ansys Zemax OpticStudio . Canonsburg, PA, USA, 2026. Available from: https: //www.ansys.com/products/optics/ansys-zemax-opticstudio .[3] Anthropic. Claude 3.5 sonnet. https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-5-sonnet ,2024. [4] Andres M Bran, Sam Cox, Oliver Schilter, Carlo Baldassari, Andrew D White, and Philippe Schwaller. Chemcrow: Augmenting large-language models with chemistry tools. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.05376 , 2023. [5] Sébastien Bubeck, Varun Chandrasekaran, Ronen Eldan, Johannes Gehrke, Eric Horvitz, Ece Kamar, Peter Lee, Yin Tat Lee, Yuanzhi Li, Scott Lundberg, Harsha Nori, Hamid Palangi, Marco Tulio Ribeiro, and Yi Zhang. Sparks of artificial general intelligence: Early experiments with gpt-4, 2023. [6] OpenClaw Contributors. Openclaw: Personal ai assistant. https://github.com/openclaw/ openclaw , 2026. [7] Geoffroi Côté, Jean-François Lalonde, and Simon Thibault. Extrapolating from lens design databases using deep learning. Optics Express , 27(20):28279–28292, 2019. [8] Geoffroi Côté, Jean-François Lalonde, and Simon Thibault. Deep learning-enabled framework for automatic lens design starting point generation. Optics Express , 29(3):3841–3854, 2021. [9] Geoffroi Côté, Fahim Mannan, Simon Thibault, Jean-François Lalonde, and Felix Heide. The differentiable lens: Compound lens search over glass surfaces and materials for object detection. In Proc. CVPR , pages 20803–20812, 2023. [10] Rishi Bommasani et al. On the opportunities and risks of foundation models, 2022. [11] Yao Gao, Qi Jiang, Shaohua Gao, Lei Sun, Kailun Yang, and Kaiwei Wang. Exploring quasi-global solutions to compound lens based computational imaging systems. IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging , 2025. [12] Yao Gao, Lei Sun, Shaohua Gao, Qi Jiang, Kailun Yang, Weijian Hu, Xiaolong Qian, Wenyong Li, Luc Van Gool, and Kaiwei Wang. Neuro-inspired automated lens design. arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.09979 , 2025. [13] Gemini. Gemini 3 flash. https://deepmind.google/models/gemini/flash/ , 2025. [14] Yuyu Geng, Lei Sun, Yao Gao, Xinxin Hu, Zhonghua Yi, Xiaolong Qian, Weijian Hu, Jian Bai, and Kaiwei Wang. Optiagent: A physics-driven agentic framework for automated optical design, 2026. [15] Google DeepMind. Gemini 2.5, 2025. Accessed: 2026-05-01. [16] Dabo Guo, Liang Yin, and Guang Yuan. New automatic optical design method based on combination of particle swarm optimization and least squares. Optics Express , 27(12):17027– 17040, 2019. [17] Sourabh Katoch, Sumit Singh Chauhan, and Vijay Kumar. A review on genetic algorithm: past, present, and future. Multimedia tools and applications , 80(5):8091–8126, 2021. [18] Aixin Liu, Bei Feng, Bing Xue, Bingxuan Wang, Bochao Wu, Chengda Lu, Chenggang Zhao, Chengqi Deng, Chenyu Zhang, Chong Ruan, et al. Deepseek-v3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19437 , 2024. [19] Xiaobing Liu, Xingxiang Zhang, Tianjiao Fu, Kaizhi Wang, Fukun Sun, Tongzheng Bai, and Duo Wang. Global information selectively guided gradient descent for ab initio optical design. 

Optics & Laser Technology , 184:112497, 2025. 10 [20] Joseph Meiron. Damped least-squares method for automatic lens design. Journal of the Optical Society of America , 55(9):1105–1109, 1965. [21] Moonshot AI. Kimi chat (version 2.4) [large language model], 2024. Accessed: 2024-05-07. [22] OpenAI. Chatgpt 5.2. https://openai.com/index/introducing-gpt-5-2/ , 2025. [23] Chen Qian, Wei Liu, Hongzhang Liu, Nuo Chen, Yufan Dang, Jiahao Li, Cheng Yang, Weize Chen, Yusheng Su, Xin Cong, et al. Chatdev: Communicative agents for software development. In Proceedings of the 62nd annual meeting of the association for computational linguistics (volume 1: Long papers) , pages 15174–15186, 2024. [24] Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and Shunyu Yao. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36:8634–8652, 2023. [25] Aaditya Singh, Adam Fry, Adam Perelman, Adam Tart, Adi Ganesh, Ahmed El-Kishky, Aidan McLaughlin, Aiden Low, AJ Ostrow, Akhila Ananthram, et al. Openai gpt-5 system card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03267 , 2025. [26] Hugo Touvron, Thibaut Lavril, Gautier Izacard, Xavier Martinet, Marie-Anne Lachaux, Timo-thée Lacroix, Baptiste Rozière, Naman Goyal, Eric Hambro, Faisal Azhar, et al. Llama: Open and efficient foundation language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2302.13971 , 2023. [27] Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan, and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. 

arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 , 2023. [28] Lei Wang, Chen Ma, Xueyang Feng, Zeyu Zhang, Hao Yang, Jingsen Zhang, Zhiyuan Chen, Jiakai Tang, Xu Chen, Yankai Lin, Wayne Xin Zhao, Zhewei Wei, and Jirong Wen. A survey on large language model based autonomous agents. Frontiers of Computer Science , 18(6), March 2024. [29] Jason Wei, Yi Tay, Rishi Bommasani, Colin Raffel, Barret Zoph, Sebastian Borgeaud, Dani Yogatama, Maarten Bosma, Denny Zhou, Donald Metzler, Ed H. Chi, Tatsunori Hashimoto, Oriol Vinyals, Percy Liang, Jeff Dean, and William Fedus. Emergent abilities of large language models, 2022. [30] Zhiheng Xi, Wenxiang Chen, Xin Guo, Wei He, Yiwen Ding, Boyang Hong, Ming Zhang, Junzhe Wang, Senjie Jin, Enyu Zhou, Rui Zheng, Xiaoran Fan, Xiao Wang, Limao Xiong, Yuhao Zhou, Weiran Wang, Changhao Jiang, Yicheng Zou, Xiangyang Liu, Zhangyue Yin, Shihan Dou, Rongxiang Weng, Wensen Cheng, Qi Zhang, Wenjuan Qin, Yongyan Zheng, Xipeng Qiu, Xuanjing Huang, and Tao Gui. The rise and potential of large language model based agents: A survey, 2023. [31] Peng Xia, Jianwen Chen, Hanyang Wang, Jiaqi Liu, Kaide Zeng, Yu Wang, Siwei Han, Yiyang Zhou, Xujiang Zhao, Haifeng Chen, Zeyu Zheng, Cihang Xie, and Huaxiu Yao. Skillrl: Evolving agents via recursive skill-augmented reinforcement learning, 2026. [32] Peng Xia, Kaide Zeng, Jiaqi Liu, Can Qin, Fang Wu, Yiyang Zhou, Caiming Xiong, and Huaxiu Yao. Agent0: Unleashing self-evolving agents from zero data via tool-integrated reasoning, 2025. [33] Ming Xu. Text2vec: Text to vector toolkit. https://github.com/shibing624/text2vec ,2023. [34] An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 , 2025. [35] John Yang, Carlos E Jimenez, Alexander Wettig, Kilian Lieret, Shunyu Yao, Karthik Narasimhan, and Ofir Press. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:50528–50652, 2024. 11 [36] Tong Yang, Guo-Fan Jin, and Jun Zhu. Automated design of freeform imaging systems. Light: Science & Applications , 6(10):e17081–e17081, 2017. [37] Xinge Yang, Qiang Fu, and Wolfgang Heidrich. Curriculum learning for ab initio deep learned refractive optics. Nature Communications , 15(1):6572, 2024. [38] Benqi Zhang, Guofan Jin, and Jun Zhu. Towards automatic freeform optics design: coarse and fine search of the three-mirror solution space. Light: Science & Applications , 10(1):65, 2021. [39] Jiajun Zhang, Zhaofeng Cen, and Xiaotong Li. Automated design of machine vision lens based on the combination of particle swarm optimization and damped least squares. In Optical Design and Testing X , volume 11548, pages 261–272. SPIE, 2020. [40] Yuntong Zhang, Haifeng Ruan, Zhiyu Fan, and Abhik Roychoudhury. Autocoderover: Au-tonomous program improvement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM SIGSOFT International Symposium on Software Testing and Analysis , pages 1592–1604, 2024. 12 Appendix A Detailed Optical Design Preliminaries Half  FoV 

> Axis
> d
> TOTR
> EFFL
> Image Plane

Figure 8: A simple example of a lens system. This section provides a comprehensive exposition of the fundamental optical principles, the physical imaging process, and the quantitative metrics essential for evaluating lens configurations within our proposed framework. A simple example of lens system is shown in Fig. 8. 

A.1 The Physical Imaging Process and Essential Components 

The formation of an optical image is a deterministic physical process governed by the laws of refraction. In a standard computational environment, this process is modeled via sequential ray tracing. Light rays propagate from a source target, traverse multiple refractive media, and ultimately converge to form a visible representation. A complete spherical lens system necessitates the following fundamental structural elements: • Object Plane: The physical or virtual surface where the target scene originates. Light rays radiate from discrete coordinate points on this plane toward the optical system. • Optical Elements: A sequence of spherical lenses manufactured from specific glass ma-terials. Each individual element is mathematically defined by its front and rear surface curvatures, central geometric thickness, and distinct material properties, specifically the refractive index and Abbe number. These elements sequentially refract incoming light bundles to precisely manipulate their trajectory. • Stops and Pupils: The aperture stop is a physical boundary that restricts the diameter of the light bundle traversing the system. It governs the overall illumination brightness and depth of field. The effective optical images of this aperture stop, as formed by the lenses preceding and following it, are formally known as the entrance pupil and exit pupil, respectively. • Image Plane: The terminal spatial surface where the refracted light rays intersect to form the final focused picture. In modern digital optics, this physical plane strictly coincides with the location of the electronic image sensor. 

A.2 Detailed Explanation of Optical Parameters 

To rigorously constrain the design parameter space and quantitatively evaluate optimization outcomes, we rely on a specific set of optical metrics. A detailed theoretical explanation of each metric is provided below: • Field of View (FoV): This metric quantifies the maximum angular extent of the external environment that the optical system can project onto the sensor. It directly dictates the observational breadth of the lens. A larger FoV corresponds to wide angle photography, whereas a narrow FoV is characteristic of telephoto systems specifically designed for distant target observation. 13 • F number (#F): Defined as the dimensionless ratio of the Effective Focal Length to the physical diameter of the entrance pupil. It serves as a universal indicator of the optical aperture size and the overall light gathering capability. A smaller F number indicates a comparatively larger aperture, allowing substantially more light to reach the sensor, which is highly beneficial for low illumination environments. • Optical Format ( d) and Semi Image Height ( y): The optical format refers to the physical diagonal dimension of the active image sensor. To prevent mechanical vignetting and ensure full sensor coverage, the optical system must project an image circle that completely encompasses this sensor. The semi-image height y is exactly half of the optical format (y = d/ 2), representing the maximum radial coordinate on the image plane that requires sharp optical resolution. • Effective Focal Length (EFFL): The physical distance measured from the rear principal plane of the optical system to the focal point on the image plane. It is the primary determinant of optical magnification. For a fixed sensor size, the EFFL mathematically restricts the Field of View, establishing a fundamental trade-off in optical geometry. • Total Track (TOTR): This absolute metric measures the physical length of the entire optical assembly, calculated along the central optical axis from the front vertex of the first lens element to the final image plane. It is a critical geometric constraint for compact device packaging, such as integrating camera modules into thin mobile devices. • Root Mean Square (RMS) Spot Radius: The most critical quantitative metric for evaluat-ing optical aberrations. When light rays from a single infinitesimal point on the object plane pass through a non ideal lens system, they do not converge perfectly to a single identical point on the image plane. Instead, they scatter mathematically to form a microscopic blur circle known as the focal spot. The RMS computes the standard deviation of the spatial distribution of these intersecting rays. A smaller RMS spot radius directly correlates to higher imaging sharpness, minimal structural aberrations, and superior spatial resolution. 

## B Detailed Related Work 

Automatic Lens Design. As previously noted, optical lens design is an empirical task highly dependent on human expertise. While modern software tools like Zemax and CODE V provide powerful simulation environments, they function primarily as calculators for intensive numerical optimization rather than autonomous decision makers. To alleviate the heavy reliance on manual labor and expert intuition, researchers have proposed various automatic lens design algorithms. These approaches primarily include methods driven by continuous optimization such as QGSO [16, 39, 11, 19, 12, 36, 38], neural network models including DeepLens [7, 8, 37], and database retrieval techniques like LensNet [8]. However, these existing solutions still present significant practical limitations, which often demand meticulous manual intervention and parameter tuning, frequently requiring several days to converge on a viable solution. Furthermore, pure retrieval techniques are inherently constrained and cannot handle novel structural requirements outside their existing libraries. In contrast, our proposed framework aims to rapidly generate compliant lens configurations through simple text interaction, entirely circumventing the need for complex parameter adjustments, specialized domain expertise, and prolonged optimization periods. 

LLMs and LLM-based Agents. Massive language models are increasingly recognized as the primary foundation for achieving artificial general intelligence [29, 5, 10]. Moving past traditional ca-pacity expansion principles, the latest generative architectures, such as LLaMA [26], DeepSeek [18], Qwen3 [34], Claude Sonnet [3], and GPT 5 [25], clearly demonstrate their capability to serve as the central reasoning mechanisms for independent automated entities [30, 28]. By encapsulating cognitive engines within interactive frameworks, intelligent agents autonomously perceive contexts, formulate plans, and execute complex actions to significantly elevate productivity. For instance, OpenClaw [6] leverages tool utilization and environmental feedback for precise robotic manipulation. Similarly, these cognitive agents are revolutionizing other specialized disciplines, ranging from ChemCrow [4] designing chemical synthesis pathways to software agents [35, 40, 23] resolving intri-cate programming anomalies. Despite these interdisciplinary triumphs, deploying such autonomous entities within the highly empirical and numerically demanding domain of optical lens design remains largely unexplored [14]. 14 C Detailed Optics-Aware Retrieval Mechanism 

This section elaborates on our Optics-Aware Retrieval module. Rather than merely returning similar documents, our retrieval framework operates as a physical performance driven selector and an Out of Distribution router. We bypass conventional semantic matching by incorporating three domain specific innovations. 

More Details about LensLib100K Construction We use the enhanced QGSO [11] automatic optical design algorithm. QGSO first define a P opulation composed of all lens structures to be optimized, where each structure is coined an Individual . Without any empirical preference, the Individual is the normalized lens parameters vector P from random initialization, and mIndividuals are initialized to constitute the P opulation for enriching diversity. Then, a hybrid global and local optimization strategy is proposed to find multiple promising high-quality structures 

ˆP for P, coined the P arent , which minimizes the Merit Function. In addition, P arent is mutated for more possible structures, the mutated P arent is then mixed with the origin P arent to serve as the start points of the next generation. Finally, the hybrid optimization, selection, and mutation processes are re-conducted for each generation, where the P arent is outputted as the diverse lens structures when the generation meets the set number. 

Simulator in the Loop Labeling Standard retrieval augmented generation relies on semantic text embeddings. Conversely, we perform physical characterization on every lens before adding it to the database. Utilizing an offline paraxial ray tracer, we evaluate each structure across multiple field coordinates to precompute essential physical metrics, including the Effective Focal Length, total track length, paraxial root mean square spot radius, and actual aperture radius. Consequently, candidate selection is solidly grounded in deterministic physical states rather than heuristic language estimations. 

Asymmetric Optical Prior Distance The absolute core of our retrieval engine is an asymmetrical distance metric designed strictly around optical engineering realities. The distance d between a candidate lens and the target specification is formulated as: 

d = wFoV · FoV lens − FoV tgt 

FoV tgt 

+ w± 

> #F

· #F lens − #F tgt 

#F tgt 

+ wRMS · RMS lens 

We assign distinct numerical weights based on absolute physical constraints. The FoV carries a massive symmetric weight of 10.0 because an optical topology is fundamentally restricted by its maximum angular acceptance, making post optimization expansion virtually impossible. Conversely, the #F weight w± 

> #F

is heavily asymmetric. If the candidate #F is larger than the target (indicating a smaller aperture), we apply a strict penalty of 1.0. Expanding an aperture physically exposes the system to severe marginal aberrations, carrying immense optimization risk. However, if the candidate #F is smaller (a larger aperture), we apply a highly lenient penalty of 0.5, because shrinking an aperture reliably eliminates aberrations with near zero risk. The paraxial root mean square radius serves merely as a tiebreaker with a minimal weight of 0.01 to prevent early overfitting to paraxial approximations. 

Two Stage Retrieval and Active Routing Our framework utilizes a widely adopted indexing database for initial screening, but pure numerical distance does not consistently guarantee the easiest trajectory. Therefore, we implement a two stage pipeline. First, the distance formula extracts the top twenty candidates. Next, a lightweight language model evaluates these candidates using structural heuristics to select the final top five starting structures. Furthermore, our retrieval module acts as an active router. If the target specifications represent an Out of Distribution query (specifically defined as a FoV deviation exceeding 10° or an #F deviation exceeding 0.5), the system explicitly attaches a Standard Operating Procedure to the prompt. This proactive routing instructs the downstream agent on the exact sequential recovery path required, significantly enhancing robustness in sparsely populated optimization spaces. 15 D Detailed Methodology 

This section provides a comprehensive technical breakdown of the autonomous optical design framework, detailing the exact physical equations, algorithmic guardrails, and prompt engineering strategies utilized to ensure physical validity and deterministic convergence. 

D.1 Optical Tool Suite Implementation 

The core of our framework relies on an optical tool suite. Unlike generic numerical editors, each tool strictly embeds optical engineering principles and boundary conditions. 

Deterministic Focal Length Alignment ( align_effl ). When aligning the effective focal length (EFFL) of a retrieved candidate to the user specification, we avoid using optimization search. Instead, we apply a deterministic geometric scaling. All surface radii, thicknesses, and semi-diameters are synchronously multiplied by a scale factor defined as scale = EFFL target /EFFL current . This transformation precisely scales the EFFL linearly while preserving the inherent relative aberration profiles. To prevent unphysical expansions, we enforce a strict 300% scaling upper limit. Crucially, the updated EFFL is immediately written back to the internal model state to prevent downstream evaluators from targeting outdated specifications. 

Guarded Single-Surface Modification ( modify_lens ). To facilitate localized adjustments, this tool alters single parameters while being constrained by five distinct physical guardrails to prevent fatal execution errors, as summarized in Table 3. Table 3: Physical guardrails implemented within the modify_lens tool. 

Guardrail Type Trigger Condition and Action 

Stop Surface Recognition Rejects semi-diameter edits on non-stop surfaces. Aperture Scaling Limits Rejects semi-diameter scaling outside the [0 .5, 3.0] ratio. Dynamic F-number Sync Synchronizes system F-number automatically after aperture edits. Material Whitelist Rejects non-catalog glasses (restricted to verified H- and D- types). Loop Prevention Rejects identical edits repeated ≥ 3 times, prompting a strategy shift. 

Optical Power-Conserving Split ( split_lens ). To mitigate severe higher-order spherical aberra-tions induced by excessive local curvature, we introduce a tool that splits a single positive lens into two separate elements. This operation rigorously conserves the original optical power ϕorig derived from the thin-lens approximation: 

ϕorig = nd − 1

Rorig 

, ϕ1 = r · ϕorig , ϕ2 = (1 − r) · ϕorig , Ri = nd − 1

ϕi

(3) The power distribution ratio r is bounded within [0 .2, 0.8] (defaulting to 0.5), ensuring a balanced division of the refractive workload. 

Penalized Local Optimization ( local_optimize ). We implement a custom finite-difference gradient descent algorithm to provide rapid, localized fine-tuning. A critical innovation here is the integration of an EFFL soft penalty directly into the objective function. This ensures that the optimizer does not collapse the macroscopic focal length to artificially minimize the root-mean-square (RMS) spot radius: 

]RMS (R) = RMS (R) + β · RMS 0 · max 



0, |EFFL − EFFL 0||EFFL 0| − τ



(4) We empirically set the penalty weight β = 0 .5 and the tolerance threshold τ = 0 .03 . The gradient is estimated using central differences with an adaptive epsilon. To ensure geometric stability, if the updated curvature flips its sign (transitioning a convex surface to concave), the step is rejected, and the radius is clamped to 95% of its previous value. Optimization terminates early if the RMS reaches a noise floor of 3 μm . The random_restart tool complements this by applying controlled random perturbations uniformly sampled up to 15% to escape local minima. 16 Ground-Truth Verification ( zemax_optimize ). The ultimate physical evaluation is conducted using the Damped Least Squares (DLS) algorithm within Zemax OpticStudio. To prevent the DLS algorithm from diverging or generating unmanufacturable shapes, we establish several critical pre-processing rules and a customized Merit Function. Most notably, we mandate that the central thickness of glass elements remains non-variable during DLS execution. Without this constraint, the optimizer frequently compresses the glass thickness to near zero, resulting in unmanufacturable hourglass-shaped lenses. Additionally, as detailed in Table 4, we assign asymmetric weightings across different field of views (FOV) and utilize unilateral penalties for the total track length (TOTR) to strictly penalize oversized systems without punishing compact ones. Table 4: Custom Merit Function configuration for Zemax DLS optimization.                 

> Operand Target Weight Physical Justification
> RSCE (Per Field) 04 / 5 / 6 Escalating weights for challenging marginal fields. EFFL / WFNO User Spec 1.0 / 2.0 Weak anchoring to prevent macroscopic drift. OPLT (Max TOTR) Max Limit 2.0 Unilateral penalty applied only when exceeding limits. MNCG 2.0mm 50.0 Hard constraint for minimum manufacturable glass thickness.

A crucial engineering component of this tool is the explicit state synchronization mechanism. Upon completion of the DLS optimization, the finalized surface geometries are immediately written back to the agent’s internal memory state. This prevents the severe desynchronization bug where the agent evaluates subsequent actions using an outdated mathematical model while the external software holds the optimized state. 

D.2 Macro Orchestration and Workflow 

To navigate the expansive optical design space effectively, we replace generic open-ended reasoning paradigms with a deterministic Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) embedded in the system prompt. The agent must sequentially execute retrieval, macroscopic alignment, microscopic optimization, and final verification. To optimize token usage and computational overhead, we introduce a two-tier evaluation mechanism. The check_spec tool acts as a rapid paraxial filter. It computes initial metrics and strictly fails any configuration exhibiting EFFL deviations greater than 2%, or parameter combinations deemed mathematically infeasible (such as an FOV deviation exceeding 50%). It uniquely employs asymmet-ric validation for the F-number, instantly passing designs with smaller-than-target F-numbers since restricting the aperture is a trivial subsequent operation. To mitigate infinite loops, a sliding window circuit breaker tracks the most recent ten tool actions. If any identical tool and normalized input combination repeats three times within this window, the system triggers a forced strategy shift. Furthermore, to accommodate context length limits, the prompt solely indexes available skills by name, dynamically loading the full verbose instructions only when the get_skill_detail function is actively invoked. 

D.3 Knowledge-Grounded Self-Evolving Mechanics 

Our framework possesses a zero-weight-updating self-evolving mechanism that autonomously distills expert strategies from task trajectories. 

Causal Trajectory Recording. Unlike conventional text-based trajectory logging, our memory module strictly tracks physical causality. Each record explicitly juxtaposes the geometric action against the resulting state changes in RMS and EFFL. 

Heuristic Distillation Filters. To ensure only high-quality knowledge enters the skill library, we apply six specific heuristic filters before distillation. Notably, the system aggressively prioritizes trajectories that succeed on out-of-distribution (OOD) parameters where the database provides poor initial coverage. Furthermore, it explicitly distills negative experiences. For example, failing after a specific glass substitution teaches the agent valuable material boundary conditions, converting a failed session into a reusable constraint rule. 17 (d).Kimi-ICL (b).QGSO  (c).Lensnet (a).DeepLens  (e).LensDESIGNER (ours) Figure 9: Additional visualized results of lens layouts and spot diagrams from the LensArena 

benchmark. L ENS DESIGNER demonstrates robust performance across a diverse range of design specifications, consistently producing optimized optical structures with superior imaging convergence compared to baseline methods. 

Optics-Aware Distillation Prompt. To prevent the skill library from being flooded with funda-mental optical textbook principles, we employ a Optics-Aware distillation strategy. The distilling language model is explicitly provided with a baseline of common optical heuristics. It is strictly instructed to reject standard practices and extract only insights that transcend this baseline, such as spe-cific non-intuitive operation sequences or extreme parametric combinations that yielded unexpected success. 

Novelty Assessment and Persistence. Extracted skills undergo rigorous deduplication. A skill is rejected if its Bigram-Jaccard similarity score compared to existing skills exceeds 0.80. However, an identical sequence of tools is still classified as a novel skill if it employs extreme numerical parameters (such as an EFFL scaling factor exceeding 2.0 or a single-step RMS improvement exceeding 80%). These validated, highly specific skills are serialized into a persistent JSON library and injected directly into the active prompt context for all subsequent tasks, establishing a continuous and interpretable evolution cycle. 

D.4 General Implementation Details 

The complete framework is instantiated utilizing the LangChain architecture, encompassing standard modular components for tool execution and retrieval. The reasoning trajectory is managed using a sliding window scratchpad that retains only the ten most recent steps to prevent context overflow. Communication with the Zemax OpticStudio environment is facilitated through a robust, cross-process Flask bridge, allowing the Python-based agent to seamlessly orchestrate the proprietary physical engine. Our hardware setup includes an NVIDIA 4090 GPU (24GB VRAM) paired with an Intel Core i9-14900K CPU and 64GB of RAM. While we access most LLMs via their official APIs, the Qwen models are deployed locally and run exclusively on our GPU. 

## E More Qualitative Results 

Here we show more qualitative results from our LensArena benchmark in Fig. 9. 

## F More Experimental Setup Details 

F.1 More Implementation Details 

We use a locally served Qwen3-32b [34] (deployed via vLLM with an OpenAI-compatible endpoint and the enable_thinking=False chat-template flag) as the primary tool-calling agent, and Gemini-3-flash-preview [13] for both the optics-aware retrieval reranker (Sec. 3.3) and the self-evolve trajectory distiller (Sec. 3.4). Lens-spec embeddings are produced by the open-source text2vec-base model [33] on a locally persisted FAISS index. We set all LLM temperatures to 0 to ensure reproducibility of tool selection, retrieval reranking, and skill distillation, with max_tokens of 512 for the agent loop, 1,000 for the reranker, and 8,000 for the distiller. Our optical simulator is a two-tier setup that couples an in-house Python paraxial ray-tracer—used for offline RAG labeling, online 18 check_spec verification, and the local_optimize finite-difference gradient descent—with Ansys Zemax OpticStudio [2] accessed through the ZOS-API .NET bindings ( pythonnet ) and wrapped behind a Flask HTTP bridge, with Zemax serving as the sole source of truth for final RMS / EFFL / F-number / merit-function values; all glass materials are restricted to the CDGM library, and Zemax local optimization runs the Damped-Least-Squares solver under our customized merit function. The ReAct controller is built on LangChain’s create_react_agent with a 10-step sliding-window scratchpad and a maximum of 25 reasoning iterations per query. 

## G Data Examples from LensArena 

Here we show some examples from our LensArena benchmark. 

Linting Error Message 

{"easy": { "data": [ {"id": 1, "fov": 30, "fnum": 4.5, "y": 10.8, "effl": 40.31, "rms_target": 0.048, "distortion_pct": 5, "difficulty": "easy", "design": "Please design an F/4.5 lens with a FOV of 30 degrees, half image height y=10.8mm, target RMS < 0.048mm, and distortion \leq 5%." 

> ,→
> ,→

}, {"id": 11, "fov": 25, "fnum": 5.9, "y": 2.0, "effl": 9.02, "rms_target": 0.056, "distortion_pct": 5, "difficulty": "easy", "design": "Could you design a lens for me with FOV=25 degrees and F/5.9, featuring a half image height y=2.0mm, target RMS < 0.056mm, and distortion \leq 5%?" 

> ,→
> ,→

}]}, ... "medium": { "data": [ {"id": 16, "fov": 70, "fnum": 2.6, "y": 5.3, "effl": 7.57, "rms_target": 0.057, "distortion_pct": 5, "difficulty": "medium", "design": "I need you to design a lens with a 70-degree FOV and F/2.6. The half image height should be y=5.3mm, target RMS < 0.057mm, and distortion \leq 5%." 

> ,→
> ,→

}, 

19 {"id": 17, "fov": 105, "fnum": 4.5, "y": 3.0, "effl": 2.3, "rms_target": 0.03, "distortion_pct": 5, "difficulty": "medium", "design": "Design an F/4.5 lens with a 105-degree FOV for me, where half image height y=3.0mm, target RMS < 0.03mm, and distortion \leq 5%." 

> ,→
> ,→

}]}, ... "hard": { "data": [ {"id": 10, "fov": 110, "fnum": 1.9, "y": 2.0, "effl": 1.4, "rms_target": 0.048, "distortion_pct": 5, "difficulty": "hard", "design": "Can you design a lens with FOV=110 degrees, F/1.9, half image height y=2.0mm, target RMS < 0.048mm, and distortion \leq 5/%?" 

> ,→
> ,→

}, {"id": 13, "fov": 10, "fnum": 2.0, "y": 3.6, "effl": 41.15, "rms_target": 0.038, "distortion_pct": 5, "difficulty": "hard", "design": "I would like you to design a lens featuring a 10-degree FOV and F/2.0, with a half image height y=3.6mm, target RMS < 0.038mm, and distortion \leq 5%." 

> ,→
> ,→

}]}}

Figure 10: Some examples from our LensAreana benchmark. Queries are divided into three difficulty levels. Most challenging queries (e.g. ultra-wide-angle lenses and large-aperture lenses) are included. For each query, there is an RMS target to determine whether the result is successful or not. 

## H Limitations and Broader Impact 

H.1 Detailed Limitations 

While L ENS DESIGNER significantly advances autonomous optical engineering, several technical boundaries remain: 20 • Geometrical Constraints: Our current framework is primarily optimized for co-axial spherical systems. It does not yet natively support off-axis systems, tilted components, or non-imaging optics (e.g., light guides), which require higher-dimensional spatial reasoning. • Material Selection: The agent currently selects from a predefined subset of common optical glasses. Expanding this to full industrial catalogs (e.g., Schott or Ohara) or incorporating temperature-dependent refractive index data ( dn/dT ) would significantly increase the search space complexity. • Computational Latency: The system’s performance is partially bottlenecked by the API call latency of commercial ray-tracing kernels. Developing a lightweight, differentiable proxy for initial structural screening could further accelerate the self-evolving process. 

H.2 Broader Impact H.2.1 Intended Uses 

LENS DESIGNER aims to democratize high-end optical engineering through several key applications: • Accelerating R&D: Reducing the design cycle for consumer electronics, medical imaging, and automotive sensors from weeks to minutes. • Educational Support: Serving as an interactive pedagogical tool for students to explore the trade-offs between lens complexity and imaging performance. • Cross-Disciplinary Innovation: Enabling researchers in fields such as robotics or biology to customize specialized imaging systems without requiring years of domain-specific training. 

H.2.2 Potential Risks and Mitigations 

The automation of physical design carries inherent responsibilities: • Dual-Use Concerns: Advanced engineering tools could theoretically be applied to develop components for surveillance or specialized weaponry. We advocate for integrating safety alignment protocols within the foundation models to flag requests that violate security norms. • Over-reliance on Simulation: AI-generated designs may not fully account for manufac-turing tolerances (e.g., centering errors, mounting stresses). We emphasize that L ENS -DESIGNER is an augmentative tool ; final designs must undergo rigorous optomechanical tolerance analysis by experts before fabrication. • Environmental Impact: Large-scale agentic frameworks consume significant computa-tional power. Our self-evolving mechanism mitigates this by distilling experience into a compact library, reducing the need for brute-force optimization in future tasks. 21