Title: A note on reinforcement learning to develop self-defined agents' behavior

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.03445v1

Published Time: Wed, 05 Aug 2026 00:53:09 GMT

Number of Pages: 15

Markdown Content:
1

A note on r einforcement learning to develop self -defined agents' behavior 

Matteo Morini and Pietro Terna ¥, December 2020. 

Abstract 

The key point in th is note is the self -development of simple behavior strategies, consistent ly with the 

bounded rationality hypothesis. Our artificial agents adopt learning techniques, mainly unsupervised, 

to achieve internal consistency in their behavior, with unexpected results . Those results can be 

considered mainly as the effects of the observe r interpretation. The first technique in u se has the name 

Cross Targets: to train the learning agent we use data crossed between the guesses about the action 

to be done and the guesses about the following results. An application of the CT “blind” strategy 

development is then presented: random walkers solve a node classification problem on a graph, after 

having learnt how to remain in homogeneous regions. 

Introduction 

In the bounded rationality perspective , we have to take in deep consideration the lea rnin g

phenomenon. We can investigate it via reinforcement learning techniques, mainly applied to artificial 

neural networks , as a way to shape agents’ behavior. 

A special line of work is that of inducing agents to develop their way of behaving , without using a 

priori (economic ) rules. The s ection 1. Cross Targets (CT) develops such idea and introduces the 

structure of an original method. The core of the technique is explained at first and then while 

describing the examples some sophistications are introduced, like the poss ibility of tuning agents’ 

behavio r. 

In the section 2. Experiments we introduce a few examples, starting with a si mple analysis of the 

movements of an agent foraging for food. In a second example, the agent is supposed to behave in an 

(economic ) context, via a model describing a con sumer reacting to price changes. 

The section 3. Advanced techniques and perspectives introduces a significant step ahead, considering 

adaptive agents evolving an exploration strategy on graphs – an updated reinforcement learning 

technique of sorts – and introducing learning in agents to be employed in solving a classification 

problem insp ired by standard semi -supervised learning.      

> ¥Matteo Mor ini, Credimi S.p.A , Italia , 0000 -000 2-5328 -8613
> Pietro Te rna, University of Torino, Italia ,retired professor , and Fondazione Collegio Carlo Alberto,
> Honorary Fello w, 0000 -0002 -7416 -0870 ,pietro .ter na @unito.it

2

1. Cross T arget s (CT) 

Recent works underline the importance of the agent -based constructions to develop models of 

bounded ratio nality with learning agents (e.g., chapter 5 of Delli Gatti et al. , 2018) .

The critical question is: in which way we define the rules for our agents , escaping from our 

subjectivity ?

To reply, w e introduce the Cross Targets (CTs), a technique coming from previous work s of one of 

us (starting from Terna’s chapter 4 in Beltratti, Margarita and Terna, 1996) . T he name is related to 

the way we follow to figure out the learning targets in a class of models founded upon ar tificial 

adaptive agents , whose main characteri stic is developing some internal consistency. 

Our agents are developed via neural networks. 

We can specify two types of outputs of the artificial neural network upo n which we build each agent :

(1) a ctions to be performed and (2) evaluations of the effects of those actions. With our technique, 

both the targets necessary to train the network from the point of view of the actions, and those 

connected with the effec ts, are built in a crossed way. The targets of type (1) are built in a consistent 

way with the outputs of the network concerning the guesses of the outputs of type ( 2), in order to 

develop the capability of deciding actions close to the expected results. The targets of type (2) are 

built in a consistent way wit h the outputs of the networ k concerning the guesses of the outputs of type 

(1); in this way , we will improve also the agent's capability of estimating the effects emerging from 

the actions that she is deciding. 

1.1 The idea behind the mechanism 

What is the idea behind such a mechanism? Our hypothesis is that an agent acting in an (economic )

environment must develop and adapt her capability of evaluating in a coherent way what she has to 

do in order to obtain a specific result or to appreciate the consequences of a specific action. The same 

is true if the agent is interacting with other agent s of the same population or of other populations. 

The idea received some parallel conformations by a n interview to Sarah -Jayne Blakemore (Zimmer, 

2005) :

In recent years, scientists have moved beyond injured brains to healthy ones, thanks to 

advances in bra in imaging. At University College London, researchers have been using 

brain scans to decipher how we become aware of our own bodies. «This is the very basic, 

low -level first point of the self » UCL’s Sarah -Jayne Blakemore says. 3

When our brains issue a comm and to move a part of our bodies, two signals are sent. One 

goes to the brain regions that control the particular parts of the body that need to move, 

and another goes to regions that monitor the movements. «I like to think of it as a ‘cc’ of 

an e -mail,» B lakemore observes. «It’s all the same information sent to a different place. »

See also Blakemore and Frith (2003) about some researches in this perspective. More recently, we 

found idea quite close to our agent scheme , in the direction of the self -supervised prediction (Pathak, 

et al., 2017) .

1.2 The learning phases 

Beyond consistency, we can add other characteristics, mainly to obtain the possibility of tuning agents 

to make experiments. 

The CTs technique attributes a central role to learning mechanisms and can be applied without 

introducing, either explicitly or implicitly, (economic ) rules in order to influence or to characterize 

agents' behavior . The aim is conducting (economic ) experim ents without the influence of any prior 

(economi c) hypothesis .

We will see that CTs can reproduce (economic ) subjects' behavior, often in internal ingenuous ways, 

but externally with apparently complex results. The behavior , simple or complex, can appear directly 

as a by -product of the development of consistency between (1) decisions about actions and (2) 

guesses about effects. For an external observer, the agent is apparently operating with goals and plans. 

Obviously, it ha s no such symbolic entities, which are creations of the observer. The similarity that 

we recall here is that the observations and analyses about real world agents' behavior can suffer from 

the same bias. 

The CT s algorithm introduced here is not the unique way of dealing with agents in a way consistent 

with the bounded rationality hypothesis, but it represents an interesting tool because it does no t

require injections of rules, optimizing behavior , planning capabilities, but only a limited 

computational abi lity: t hat one necessary to take simple decisions and to compare guesses with results. 

We choose the neural approach to develop CTs mostly as a consequence of the intrinsic adaptive 

capabilities of neural functions. Here we will use feed forward multilaye r ones. 

Target s in learning process are: (1) o n one side, the actual effects of the actions made by the simulated 

subject; (2) on the other side, the actions needed to match those guessed effects. 

Figure 1 describes an agent learning and behaving in a CT scheme. The agent has to produce guesses 

about both its actions and their effects, on the basis of an information set (the input elements are I 1, ..., 

Ik). Actual effects are estimated through the guessed actions, considering also the consequences from 4

the interaction among agents, if any; the results are used to train the mechanism that guesses the 

effects. The a ctions necessary to match guessed effects are, on the contrary, employed to train the 

decision mechanism about activities . In the last case , we have to use inverse rules, even though some 

problems arise when the inverse is indeterminate.     

> Figure 1–The CT sc heme

The CT method can appear to be related to Temporal Difference (TD) Learning of Barto and S utton 

(Sutton 19 88 ), using the differences between temporally successive predictions - or action outcomes 

- of the system, having a final target perfectly known at the end of the run. In the TD method we have 

a special and powerful case of true supervised learning, where an externa l teacher can suggest correct 

target values. TD, as CT, addresses the issue of consistent learning, but with delayed feedback 

founded upon a true target value; CT uses immediate tentative targets, self -generated and never 

corrected by an external teac her. The aim of CT is that of generating time paths for relevant variables, 

without any final or intermediate externally known objective, operating only with simple rules to 

adapt both behavior and predictions. 

Observing Figure 1, we have: (i ) the inputs of the model are mainly data coming from the environme nt 

or from other agents' behavio r, (ii ) they can be dependent or independent from the previous actions 

of the simulated artificial subject, (iii ) targets are known only when actions take place. 5

Learning and a cting ta ke place in four steps each 'cycle '; a cycle is the sum of the four steps required 

to perform a full cycle of estimation of outputs and of backpropagation of errors, correcting the neural 

network weights (parameters) .

Looking at Figure 1, the four steps can be introduced in the following sequence. 

> (

1) Outputs of the artificial neural network : t he actions to be accomplished, reporte d in the right side 

of Figure 1, and the effects of these actions, reported in the left side of the same figure, are gue ssed 

following inputs and network weights. 

(2) Targets for the left side of the network: t he targets for the effects supposed to arise from the actions, 

as guessed in the left side of the output layer in Figure 1, are figured out by the independently guess ed 

actions. In this way, guesses about effects become closer to the true consequences of actual actions. 

(3) Targets for the right side of the network: t he differences measured in step (2) among targets and 

neural ne twork outputs on the effect side can be inversely interpreted as starting points for action 

modifications, to match the guessed effects. So, they are used to build the targets for the mechanism 

that guesses the actions. Being the inverses of the formulas shown below often undefined, corrections 

are shared randomly among all the targets to be constructed; besides, when several corrections 

concern a target, only the one with the highest module is chosen. In this way, we would like to imitate 

the actual behavior of a subject requested of obeying to several independent and inconsistent 

co mmands: p robably the most imperative, here the largest value, will be followed. 

(4) Backpropagation: l earning takes place, correcting weights in order to obtain guessed effects close r

to the consequences of guessed actions, and guessed actions more consistent with guessed effects. 

Thus, we have two learning processes, both based upon the guesses of the elements of the opposite 

side of the network. 

This double side process of adaptatio n, with interaction among agents and long -term learning (see 

above) , ensures the emergences of non -trivial self -developed behavio r outcomes .

We can now explain in a formal way the acting and learning structure of CTs, introducing a generic 

effect E 1 arising from two actions, named A 1 and A 2. The target for training a neural network able to 

reproduce this effect is: 

E1' = f(A 1, A2) (1) 

where f is a definition, linking actions to effects on an accounting basis. 

Our first goal here is to obtain an output E 1 (the guess made by the neural network) closer to E 1', 

which is the correct measure of the effect of actions A 1 and A 2. The error related to E 1 is: 

e = E 1' - E1

or, by convention in neural network backpropagation , one half of th e square of E 1' - E1. To minimiz e

the error, we backpropagate it through network parameters ( weights ).6

The second (parallel) aim is that of ruling the actions, as outputs of our neural network, as more 

consistent with the outputs produced by the effect side. So , we have to correct A 1 and A 2 to made 

them closer to A 1' and A 2', which are actions consistent with the output E 1. We cannot figure out the 

targets fo r A 1 and A 2 separately. From ( 1) we have: 

A1 = g1(E 1', A2) (2) 

A2 = g2(E 1', A1) (3) 

Choosing a value τ1 from a random uniform distribution whose support is the closed interval [0,1] 

and setting τ2 = 1 - τ1, from (2) and ( 3) we obtain: 

A1' = g 1(E 1' - e·τ 1, A2) (4) 

A2' = g 2(E 1' - e·τ 2, A1) (5) 

Functions g1 and g2, being obtained from definitions that link actions to effects mainly on an 

accounting basis, usually have linear specifications; as a consequence, equations (4) and ( 5) generally 

give solutions that are globally consistent. The errors to be minimized are: 

a1 = A 1' - A1

a2 = A 2' - A2

Eqs. 4 and 5 would not work as inversions of true dynamic functions, but the y are used here as a 

simplified tool ( thanks to the presence of random separation obtained by τ1 and τ2 values), to generate 

time paths for variables, without a priori or external suggestions. 

When the actions determine multiple effects, they are included in mult iple definitions of effects: those 

actions will be affected by several corrections; as reported in (3) above, only the largest absolute 

value is chosen. 

Input and target variability, generated both in deterministic or random ways, is required to ensure the 

plausibility of the experiments, but is also necessary to ensure that are changing the output s and the 

targets of the neural network under training . Lacking such a variability, on the basis of initial random 

weights of the network and following CTs, in most cases all outputs would be frozen at about 0.5, 

with perfect but merely apparent learning r esults. 

1.3 Short e long term 

With the proper variability, we repeat for a given number of cycles ( e.g., real life days) the four steps 

introduced describing Figure 1. The learning activity follows the fourth step of each cycle and gives 

a sort of local adaptation to the changes of the environment. 

Analyz ing the changes of the weight (parameters of the neural network function) during that process ,

we can show that the matrix of weights linking input to hidden elements has little or no changes, 7

while the matrix of weights from hidden to output layer changes in a relevant way. Only the hidden -

output weight changes determine the continuous adaptations of the neural network responses to the 

environment modifications, while the output values of hidden layer elements stay almost constant. 

This is the consequence of very small changes in targets (generated by CT method) and of a reduced 

number of learning cycles. 

The resulting network is certainly undertrained . Consequently, the simulated economic agent 

develops a local ability to make decisions, but it has difficulties in coping with large environmental 

changes. This case resembles an actual consumer who is not able to determine her demand if prices 

change dramatically. 

This is short term learning and it is opposed to long term learning, in analogy with the psychologists' 

distinction betwee n short and long term memory: (a ) The learning and acting phase produces neural 

agents continuously modifying their weights, in a loca l way, to ad apt to environmental changes; (b )

ex post, relearning the weights of the neural networks engaged in the experiment and using as data 

the historical records of the occurred events, we can obtain neural networks able to react, without 

subsequent learning, also to major changes in environmental conditions. 

The second type of learning can also take place periodically upon a short segment of da ta (for example, 

every fifty cycle s referring to the previous one hundre d cycle s, or upon a sample of the full historical 

data set, always with satisfying results). 

2. Two examples 

We introduce two examples 1 of short/ long term learning and behaving activities : t he first one is 

related to a simple experiment of motion, and the second one is related to an agent making two 

independent guesses, on the basis of a single input, the price pa, which exogenously changes following 

a sin function plu s a random noise. The two g uesses are: t he quantity qa of the good Ca to be acquired; 

the expenditure x.

2.1 First example: movement 

First example: t he experiment on motion of agents foraging for food is built upon the following 

scheme.    

> 1The reader can run the experiments with the code at https://github.com/terna/ct .

8

On a plane with ( x, y) coordinates, the subject is initially in ( 10 , 10 ) while the food is fixed in ( 0, 0). 

The neural network simulating the subject has as the inputs (which are the targets founded in the 

previous cycle): 

X(t-1), position in the x direction at the time t-1; 

Y(t-1), position in the y direction at the time t-1; 

dX (t-1), step in the directions x, at time t-1 (bounded in the range ±1); 

dY (t-1), step in the directions y, at time t-1 (bounded in the range ±1). 

Using the CT terminology, the same neural network produces as outputs two gue sses about effects 

and two guesses about actions. 

Position s X(t) and Y(t) have also the mea ning of measuring the distance of the artificial subject from 

the food , set in ( 0, 0) (distance evaluated employing rectangular coordinates). 

In Figure 2a we report the position of the agent in 200 cycles of acting and learning. The agent rushes 

toward the food but then stuck in the middle of the path .           

> Figure 2a –Moving spontaneously Figure 2b –Moving with Figure 2c –Moving quic kly.
> generated with a suggestion post long -term learning

The mechanism works in the following way: in the starting phase of the experiment , the neural 

network produces random outputs, but in a small interval around the central value between min and 

max . This effect is always present and is easily explained consi dering the consequence of the initial 

random choice of the weights, that gives on average a null sum of the inputs of the internal sigmoidal 

transformation. The initial guesses about the effects of the movement give estimated positions with 

large variabili ty around the point ( 0, 0) where the food is placed .

CTs immediately correct these wrong estimates, but they also correct the guesses about actions (the 

movement s), to d evelop their consistency with the guesses of effects. In Figure 2a, the artificial agent 

moves in the right direction, but the process rapidly falls in a locking si tuation, with mutual 

consistency between effects and actions. 

Imposing now an external objective on the side of the effects, that is the target of reducing in each 

cycle the distance from food to the 75% of the distance of the previous step , the food is easily gained, 9

as reported in Figure 2b . We underline that no suggestion is introduced about the direction of the 

movement. 

In Figure 2c we present again the case of Figure 2b , but with an artificial neural net work whose 

weights come from a repe ated learning process of 200 thousand cycles. The learning process is 

applied upon the full 200 cycles historical data of a single acting and learn ing run, in sequential order, 

with a momentum coefficient (usual value: 0.9) .

The simulated agent reaches the food in few steps (less than one hundred), going directly toward it, 

despite some realistic (for the observer) uncertainty. 

2. 2 Second example: reacting to price changes 

Second example: the simulated subject has to make two independent guesses, on the basis of a single 

input, the price pa, which exogenously changes following a sin function plu s a random noise. The 

guesses are: t he quantity qa of the good Ca to be acquired; the expenditure x. The c ross -targets are 

easily established with: 

x' = pa·qa

qa' = qa + ( x - x')/ pa = x/pa

where, on one hand, x' is the true expenditure , consistent with the decision qa; on the other hand, qa'

is the correct decision necessary to acquire the quantity of A consistent with the guess x. If x' < x, the 

guess of qa must be increased by the amount ( x - x')/ p and vice versa.     

> Figure 3–A pseudo demand function, self -generated

10 

In Figure 3 we have prices and guessed quantities ( qa_g ) for a thousand cycle s of lea rning and acting; 

in the figure we have reported a sample of the data, based on a cycle every ten cycle . The simulated 

subject has self -developed the capability of reacting to price changes, smoothing the effects on its 

level of e xpense by quantity adjustment: w hat is emerging is a kind of demand curve without the need 

of an optimiz ation hypothesis . Surprising ly, the mechanism, albeit very simple, is autonomously and 

endogenously deve loped by the model. 

The dynamic : w hen the price changes, the cross -target mechanism determines two symmetrical 

corrections. Let us suppose tha t the price is increa sing : t he neural network outcomes, at the beginning 

of the learning p rocess, are very conservative; consequently, in short term runs , the guesses about the 

expenditure (the effect) and about the quantity (the action) adapt themselves very slowly to the 

changing input. The expenditure evaluation will therefore be underestimated and corrected by 

increasing it; vice versa, the quantity, which has to be consistent with the guess about the expenditure ,

which is underestimated, has to be corrected by decreasing it. We have thus two symmetrical 

corrections. 

Realistically, the results are not stric tly exact nor deterministic. Is this a demand curve? In a strict 

sense it is not, but it des cribes very well a common behavio r, perfectly consistent with the bounded 

rationality hypothesis. 

3. Advanced techniques and perspectives 

When we mention swarms of particles performing a distributed effort in order to perform a task, we 

canno t omit the humble random walkers (henceforth, RWs). Although very limited in their 

sophistication, and operational latitude, they can – and have been – successfully employed in network 

science to tackle a well -studied family of problems. 

Contrary to standard PSO (Eberhart and Kennedy, 1995), where each “particle” represents a potential 

solution, searching the parameters space, we propose an algorithm aime d at converging to an 

equilibrium solution by means of a cooperative effort by multiple walkers, each one providing 

piecewise information adding up to a globally sensible response. 

3.1 An Application to Complex Networks 

In the “graph labeling problem”, we observe a subset of labeled nodes on a network structure of the 

form G(U, E w), where U is the set of nodes and E w is the set of weighted, possibly directed edges. 

The purpose of the process is to appropriately label the entirety of nodes, based on some classification 

paradigm. Subramanya and Talukdar, 2014 makes for an excellent introductory read. 11 

As a prime example, and given the prompt availability of such data, we may observe an online social 

network of some kind, wher e neighboring individuals/nodes – and nodes reachable in a few steps in 

general – will tend to exhibit homophily: similar individuals will be more likely to be linked. 

Intuitively put, it can be argued that “diffusing” the available pieces of information ( labels) around, 

within a given topological distance from a labeled node, may be informative of the characteristics of 

the anonymous nodes too. For the sake of simplicity, let's also assume a binary categorical labeling, 

where a few nodes are known to belon g (are labeled) to either the “red” or the “blue” team. Roughly 

speaking, inferring the team of the anonymous nodes can be performed by sending RWs along the 

network, counting the number of visits payed to each node by class of the RW's originating node, and 

observing which kind of visiting agent is prevalent. 

3.2 Nodes labelling and graph -based semi -supervised learning (G -SSL) 

Multiple algorithms in this vein have been proposed (see, as a prominent example, PageRank, in Brin 

and Page, 1998, or de Nigris et al. , 2017 for a comprehensive review of applications), which can be 

solved either analytically, with a closed form solution (the analytical approach, though, comes with 

a major scaling problem, due to the computational cost of inverting a very large mat rix), or as a –

case in point – random walk simulation. We take the latter approach, in order to present and solve 

the problem as a distributed, independent effort by multiple, rationally bounded entities gathering and 

exploiting information locally (this approach also preserves scalability up to very large -scale datasets).       

> Figure 4-Seed nodes on a partially labeled graph Figure5 -Node classification by CT -GSSL

12 

3.3 Random Walkers working as a learning system 

A set of RWs is created and sent around the network, starting from labeled “seed” nodes (see Figure 

4, seed nodes colored in red and blue, respectively), and hopping between nodes, in turn increasing a 

class -specific visits counter for everyone : every time a node is visited by a RW, it increases its 

likelihood to belong to the former's class accordingly. Visited nodes will be considered to belong to 

the class of the prevailing seed color, and consequentially classified. A successful classification 

would ap pear as the one presented in Figure 5. 

In order to attribute due relevance to the class of the RW's originating node, the concept of “restarting 

probability” is introduced: with a given probability 1-pr, RWs can either keep on with their 

exploration, or (w ith probability pr) go back to their originating node, ready to travel along a brand -

new itinerary taming the diffusive process and keeping it from converging to the stationary 

distribution of a RW. 

The shortcomings of existing algorithms are known and include the misclassification of nodes 

originating from the diffusion of walkers through spurious links connecting the classes and is apparent 

when benchmarking them on graphs with known, and well -defined, planted partitions (again, refer to 

Subramanya and Talukdar, op. cit. ). Multiple efforts to improve the algorithms accuracy have been 

undertaken by the research community, and a vast literature exists on the topic. 

3.4 A learning classification system 

The following exercise is meant to constitute an at tempt at going beyond the existing, zero -

intelligence, diffusive techniques, allowing RWs to acquire an exploration strategy which is not 

constrained by any a priori assumption on the characteristics of the problem. Let us envision a 

sophisticated kind of RW which is endowed with some sort of directed intelligence, biasing the 

process based on some learnt heuristics instead of on some external, arbitrarily chosen, metric. 

At each iteration, each RW is required to move onto a node picked out of its first neighbors; the 

intended aim is to keep moving onto nodes belonging to the same partition, given the information 

available, and refraining from crossing “partitions boundarie s”. The CT is fed (input neurons) with 

data on both the originating ( u), the potential destination ( v) node, and eventually (in the case of a 

weighted graph) the link weight (w uv ); on the output side a positive response (+1) will be elicited by 

a successfu l transition (on a node belonging to the same partition), whereas a faux pas towards a 

different partition will result in a null value (0). 13 

Inputted data consist of local information – a vector of characteristics (metadata) of nodes u and v –

and network -specific metrics, which may (e.g. Betweenness Centrality ) or may not (e.g. Degree )

incorporate structural -topological, global aspects. 

For each RW, the target ( à la CT) is supposed, as mentioned earlier, not to trespass communities 

boundarie s, that is, to keep exploring homogeneous areas of the network; from the ANN perspective, 

being awarded a positive value on the output node. 

In the training phase, a benchmark network is used to expose the cross -target -based, neural -network -

powered agents to the “environment” to which they are supposed to adapt, going through the 4 steps 

illustrated in the paragr aph “The Learning Phases”, above. Once consistency and an appropriate 

strategy have been developed, eventually checking for individual idiosyncrasi es, experiments can be 

performed on partially labeled networks, assessing the accuracy of the process. Finally, primed RWs, 

validated for the task, can be put to work on different networks. 

A particularly intriguing application involves evolving temporal n etworks (such as contact networks), 

where new nodes appear: specifically, trained agents may be employed to incrementally label them 

as the network evolves. 

As a final consideration, we dispose of a scalable, intrinsically parallel algorithm, capable of 

ach ieving high -accuracy classification of nodes and, as a bonus, making the best use of available 

information in order to inform the exploration process. 

References 

Beltratti, A., Margarita, S. and Terna, P. (1996). Neural networks for economic and financial 

modelling . London: International Thomson computer Press. 

Blakemore, S. and Frith, C. (2003). Self -awareness and action. Current Opinion in Neurobiology ,

13(2), pp.219 -224. 

Brin, S., Page, L. (1998). The anatomy of a large -scale hypertextual Web search engine. Computer 

Networks and ISDN Systems, 30, pp.107 -117. 

Delli Gatti, D., Fagiolo, G., Gallegati, M., Richiardi, M. and Russo, A. (2018). Agent -Based Models 

in Economics - A Too lkit . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

de Nigris , S., Bautista, E., Abry, P., Avrachenkov, K., Gonçalves, P. (2017). Fractional Graph -based 

Semi -Supervised Learning. In: 25th European Signal Processing Conference (EUSIPCO). 

Eberhart, R., Kennedy, J. (1995). A new optimizer using particle swarm theory. I n: MHS'95. 

Proceedings of the Sixth International Symposium on Micro Machine and Human Science. 14 

Sutton, R. (1988). Learning to predict by the methods of temporal differences. Machine Learning ,

3(1), pp.9 -44. 

Pathak, D., Agrawal, P., Efros, A. and Darrell, T. (2017). Curiosity -driven exploration by self -

supervised prediction. In: International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) .

Zimmer, C. (2005). The Neurobiology of the Self. Scientific American , 293(5), pp.92 -101. 

Subramanya , A., Talukdar , P. P. (2014). Graph -Based Semi -Supervised Learning. Morgan & 

Claypool Publishers.